Sunday Troparia and Kontakia
FIRST TONE:
Troparion: When the stone had been
sealed by the Jews, and the soldiers
were guarding Thine immaculate
Body, Thou didst arise on the third
day, 0 Saviour, granting life unto the
world. Wherefore, the Hosts of the
heavens cried out to Thee, 0 Lifegiver: Glory to Thy Resurrection, 0
Christ. Glory to Thy kingdom. Glory
to Thy dispensation, 0 only Lover of
mankind. 
-145-
Kontakion: As God, Thou didst arise
. from the tomb in glory, and Thou
i didst raise the world together with
Thyself. And mortal nature praiseth
Thee as God, and death hath vanished.
And Adam danceth, 0 Master, and
Eve, now freed from fetters, rejoiceth
as she crieth out: Thou art He,
0 Christ, that grantest unto all resurrection.
SECOND TONE:
Troparion: When Thou didst descend
unto death, 0 Life Immortal, then
didst Thou slay hades with the lightning of Thy Divinity. And when Thou
didst also raise the dead out of the
nethermost depths, all the Hosts of the
heavens cried out: 0 Life-giver, Christ
our God, glory be to Thee.
Kontakion: Thou didst arise from the
tomb, 0 omnipotent Saviour, and
hades was terrified on beholding the 
-146-
wonder; and the dead arose, and
creation at the sight thereof rejoiceth
with Thee. And Adam also is joyful,
and the world, 0 my Saviour, praiseth
Thee for ever.
THIRD TONE:
Troparion: Let the heavens be glad; let
earthly things rejoice; for the Lord
hath wrought might with His arm. He
hath trampled down death by death;
the firstborn of the dead hath He
become. From the belly of hades hath
He delivered us and hath granted to
the world great mercy.
Kontakion: Thou didst arise today
from the tomb, 0 Merciful One, and
didst lead us out of the gates of
death. Today Adam danceth and Eve
rejoiceth; and together with them both
the Prophets and the Patriarchs unceasingly praise the divine might of Thine
authority. 
l -147-
FOURTH TONE:
Troparion: Having learned the joyful
proclamation of the Resurrection from
the angel, and having cast off the
ancestral condemnation, the women
disciples of the Lord spake to the apostles exultantly: Death is despoiled and
Christ God is risen, granting to the
world great mercy.
Kontakion: My Saviour and Redeemer
hath, as God, raised up the earthborn
from the grave and from their fetters,
and He hath broken the gates of
hades, and, as Master, hath risen on
the third day.
FIFTH TONE:
Troparion: Let us, -o faithful, praise
and worship the Word Who is co-unoriginate with the Father and the Spirit,
and Who was born of the Virgin for
our salvation; for He was pleased to
ascend the Cross in the flesh and to 
-148-
endure death, and to raise the dead by
His glorious Resurrection.
Kontakion: Unto hades, 0 my
Saviour, didst Thou descend, and having broken its gates as One omnipotent, Thou, as Creator, didst raise up
the dead together with Thyself.
And Thou didst break the sting of
death, and didst deliver Adam from
the curse, 0 Lover of mankind.
Wherefore, we all cry unto Thee: Save
us, 0 Lord.
SIXTH TONE:
Troparion: Angelic Hosts were above
Thy tomb, and they that guarded Thee
became as dead. And Mary stood by the
grave seeking Thine immaculate Body.
Thou didst despoil hades and wast not
tempted by it. Thou didst meet the
Virgin and didst grant us life. 0 Thou
Who didst rise from the dead, 0 Lord,
glory be to Thee. 
-149-
Kontakion: Having by His life-bestowing
hand raised up all the dead out of the
dark abysses, Christ God, the Giver of
Life, hath bestowed the Resurrection
upon the fallen human race; for He is
the Saviour of all, die Resurrection,
and the Life, and the God of all.
SEVENTH TONE:
Troparion: Thou didst destroy death
by Thy Cross, Thou didst open Paradise to the thief. Thou didst change
the lamentation of the Myrrh-bearers,
and Thou didst command Thine
_.\postles to proclaim that Thou didst
arise, 0 Christ God, and grantest to
the world great mercy.
Kontakion: No longer will the dominion of death be able to keep men captive; for Christ hath descended, demolishing and destroying the powers
thereof. Hades is bound; the Prophets
rejoice with one voice, saying: A 
-150-
Saviour hath come for them that have
faith. Come forth, ye faithful, for the
Resurrection.
EIGHTH TONE:
Troparion: From on high didst Thou
descend, 0 Compassionate One; to
burial of three days hast Thou submitted that Thou mightest free us from
our passions. 0 our Life and Resurrection, 0 Lord, glory be to Thee.
Kontakion: Having arisen from the
tomb, Thou didst raise up the dead
and didst resurrect Adam. Eve also
danceth at Thy Resurrection, and the
ends of the world celebrate Thine arising from the dead, 0 Greatly-merciful
One. 
-151-
Daily Troparia and Kontakia
MONDAY-The Bodiless Hosts:
Troparion, Fourth Tone: Supreme
Commanders of the heavenly hosts, we
unworthy ones implore you that by
your supplications ye will encircle us
with the shelter of the wings of your
immaterial glory, and guard us who fall
down before you and fervently cry:
Deliver us from dangers since ye are
the Marshalls of the Hosts on high.
Kontakion, Second Tone: Supreme
Commanders of God0 and ministers of
the Divine Glory, guides of men and
leaders of the angels, ask for what is to
our profit and for great mercy, since ye
are the Supreme Commanders of the
Bodiless Hosts. 
-152-
TUESDAY-St. John the Forerunner:
Troparion, Second Tone: The memory of the righteous is celebrated with
hymns of praise, but the Lord's testimony is sufficient for thee, 0
Forerunner; for thou hast proved to be
truly even more venerable than the
prophets, since thou wast granted to
baptize in the running waters Him
Whom they proclaimed. Wherefore,
having contested for the truth, thou
didst rejoice to announce the good tidings even to those in hades: that God
hath appeared in the flesh, taking away
the sin of the world and granting us
great mercy.
Kontakion, Second Tone: 0 Prophet
of God and Forerunner of grace, having obtained thy head from the earth
as a most sacred rose, we ever receive
healings; for again, as of old in the
world, thou preachest repentance. 
-153-
WEDNESDAY and FRIDAY-the Cross:
Troparion, First Tone: Save, 0 Lord,
Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance; grant Thou unto Orthodox
Christians victory over enemies; and by
the power of Thy Cross do Thou preserve Thy commonwealth.
Kontakion, Fourth Tone: 0 Thou
Who wast lifted up willingly on the
Cross, bestow Thy mercies upon the
new community named after Thee, 0
Christ God; gladden with Thy power
the Orthodox Christians, granting
them victory over enemies; may they
have as Thy help the weapon of peace,
the invincible trophy.
THURSDAY-the Holy Apostles, and
Saint Nicholas:
1roparion to the Apostles, 1bird Tone: 0
holy Apostles, intercede with the merciful God, that He grant unto our souls 
-154-
forgiveness of offences.
Troparion to Saint Nicholas, Fourth
Tone: The truth of things revealed
thee to thy flock as a rule of faith, an
icon of meekness and a teacher of
temperance; therefore thou hast
achieved the heights by humility, riches by poverty. 0 Father and Hierarch
Nicholas, intercede with Christ God
that our souls be saved.
Kontakion to the Holy Apostles,
Second Tone: The firm and divinevoiced preachers, the chief of Thy disciples, 0 Lord, Thou hast taken to
Thyself for the enjoyment of Thy blessings and for repose; their labours and
death didst Thou accept as above every
sacrifice, 0 Thou Who alone knowest
the hearts.
Kontakion to Saint Nicholas, Third
Tone: In Myra, 0 Saint, thou didst
prove to be a minister of things sacred: 
-155-
for having fulfilled the Gospel of Christ, 0
righteous one, thou didst lay down thy
life for thy people, and didst save the
innocent from death. Wherefore, thou
wast sanctified, as a great initiate of the
grace of God.
SATURDAY-All Saints, and the
Departed:
Troparion to All Saints, Second Tone:
0 Apostles, Martyrs, and Prophets,
Hierarchs, Monastics, and Righteous
Ones; ye that have accomplished a
good labour and kept the Faith, that
have boldness before the Saviour; 0
Good Ones, intercede for us, we pray,
that our souls be saved.
Troparion for. the _ Departed, Eighth
Tone: 0 Thou Who by the depth of
Thy wisdom, out of love for mankind,
dost provide all things, and grantest
unto all that which is profitable, 0 only
Creator: Grant rest, 0 Lord, to the 
-156-
souls of Thy servants, for in Thee have
they placed their hope, 0 our Creator
and Fashioner and God.
Kontakion for the Departed, Eighth
Tone: With the saints give rest, 0
Christ, to the souls of Thy servants,
where there is neither sickness, nor
sorrow, nor sighing, but life everlasting.
Kontakion to the Martyrs, Eighth
Tone: To Thee, 0 Lord, the Planter of
creation, the world doth offer the Godbearing martyrs as the firstfruits of
nature. By their intercessions preserve
Thy Church, Thy commonwealth, in
profound peace, through the Theotokos, 0 Greatly-merciful One. 
-157-
Troparia and Kontakia of the
Immovable Great Feasts
The Nativity
of the Most Holy Theotokos
Troparion, Fourth Tone:
T
hy nativity, 0 Theotokos Virgin,*
hath proclaimed joy to all the
world;* for from thee hath dawned the
Sun of Righteousness, Christ our
God,* annulling the curse and bestowing the blessing,* abolishing death and
granting us life eternal.
Kontakion, Fourth Tone:
J
oachim and Anna were freed from
the reproach of childlessness* and
clam and Eve from the corruption of
death, by thy holy nativity, 0 immaculate one,* which thy people, redeemed 
-158-
from the guilt of offences,* celebrate
by crying to thee:* The barren woman
giveth birth to the Theotokos, the
nourisher of our life.
The Elevation of the Precious
and Life-giving Cross of the Lord
Troparion, First Tone:
S
ave, 0 Lord, Thy people,* and
bless Thine inheritance;* grant
Thou unto Orthodox Christians victory over enemies;* and by the power of
Thy Cross do Thou preserve Thy commonwealth.
Kontakion, Fourth Tone:
0 Thou Who wast lifted up willingly on the Cross,* bestow Thy mercies upon the new community named
after Thee, 0 Christ God;* gladden with
Thy power the Orthodox Christians,*
granting them victory over enemies;*
may they have as Thy help the weapon
of peace, the invincible trophy. 
-159-
The Entry of Our Most Holy Lady
Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary
into the Temple
Troparion, Fourth Tone:
T
oday is the prelude of God's goodwill* and the heralding of the sal-
-ration of mankind.* In the temple of
God, the Virgin is presented openly,*
and she proclaimeth Christ unto all.*
To her, then, with a great voice let us
cry aloud:* Rejoice, 0 thou fulfillment* of the Creator's dispensation.
Kontakion, Fourth Tone:
T
he most pure temple of the
Saviour,* the most precious bridalchamber and Virgin,* the sacred treasury of the glory of God,* is on this day
brought into the house of the Lord,*
bringing with her the grace that is in
the Divine Spirit.* And the angels of
God chant praise unto her:* she is the
heavenly tabernacle. 
-160-
The Nativity of Our Lord God
and Saviour Jesus Christ
Troparion, Fourth Tone:
T
hy Nativity, 0 Oirist our God,* hath
shined upon the world the light of
knowledge;* for thereby, they that worshipped the stars* were taught by a
star* to worship Thee, the Sun of
Righteousness,* and to know Thee,
the Dayspring from on high.* 0 Lord,
glory be to Thee.
Kontakion, Third Tone:
T
oday the Virgin giveth birth to
Him Who is transcendent m
essence;* and the earth offereth a cave
to Him Who is unapproachable.*
Angels with shepherds give glory;*
with a star the Magi do journey;* for
our sake a young Child is born, Who is
pre-eternal God. 
-161-
The Theophany of our Lord God
and Saviour Jesus Christ
Troparion, First Tone:
"l A 7hen Thou wast baptized in the
V VJ ordan, 0 Lord,* the worship of
the Trinity was made manifest;* for the
voice of the Father bare witness to
Thee,* calling Thee His beloved Son.*
And the Spirit in the form of a dove*
confirmed the certainty of the world.*
0 Christ our God, Who hast appeared*
and hast enlightened the world, glory
be to Thee.
Kontakion, Fourth Tone:
T
hou hast appeared today unto the
whole world,*- and Thy light, 0
Lord, hath been signed upon us* who
with knowledge chant unto Thee:*
Thou hast come, Thou hast appeared,*
0 Light Unapproachable. 
-162-
The Meeting of the Lord
Troparion, First Tone:
R
ejoice, thou who art full of grace,
0 Virgin Theotokos, * for from
thee hath risen the Sun of Righteousness, Christ our God,* enlightening
those in darkness.* Rejoice, thou also,
0 righteous Elder,* as thou receivest
in thine arms the Redeemer of our
souls,* Who also granteth unto us the
Resurrection.
Kontakion, First Tone:
T
hou who didst sanctify the Virgin's
womb by Thy birth,* and didst
bless Symeon's hands as was meet,* by
anticipation didst even now save us, 0
Christ God.* But grant peace in the
midst of wars unto Thy commonwealth,* and strengthen Orthodox
Christians* whom Thou hast loved, 0
only Lover of mankind. 
-163-
The Annunciation
of the Most Holy Theotokos
Troparion, Fourth Tone:
T
oday is the fountainhead of our
salvation* and the manifestation
of the mystery which was from eternity.* The Son of God becometh the
Virgin's Son,* and Gabriel proclaimeth
the good tidings of grace;* wherefore,
we also cry to the Theotokoswith him:*
Rejoice, thou who art full of grace,*
the Lord is with thee.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone:
T
o thee, the Champion Leader,
we thy servants dedicate a feast of
\ictory and of thanksgiving* as
ones rescued out of sufferings, 0
Theotokos;* but as thou art one with
might which is invincible,* from all
dangers that can be do thou deliver us,
that we may cry to thee:* Rejoice, thou
Bride U nwedded. 
-164-
The Transfiguration of the Lord
Troparion, Seventh Tone:
T
hou wast transfigured on the
mountain, 0 Christ our God,*
showing to Thy disciples Thy glory as
each one could endure;* shine forth
Thou on us, who are sinners all, Thy
light ever-unending* through the
prayers of the Theotokos. 0 Lightgiver, glory to Thee.
Kontakion, Seventh Tone:
O
n the mount Thou wast transfigured,* and Thy disciples, as
much as they could bear, beheld Thy
glory, 0 Christ God;* so that when
they should see Thee crucified,* they
would know Thy passion to be willing,*
and would preach to the world* that
Thou, in truth, art the Effulgence of
the Father. 
-165-
The Dormition
of The Most Holy Theotokos
Troparion, First Tone:
I
n giving birth thou didst preserve
thy virginity;* in thy dormition thou
didst not forsake the world, 0
Theotokos. * Thou wast translated
unto life,* since thou art the Mother of
Life;* and by thine intercessions dost
thou deliver our souls from death.
Kontakion, Second Tone:
T
he grave and death could not
hold the Theotokos, * who is
sleepless in her intercessions and an
unfailing hope in her mediations.*
For as the Mother of Life she was translated unto life* by Him Who dwelt in
her ever-virgin womb. 
-166-
Troparia, Kontakia, Prayers, and
Stichera from the Triodion
THE SUNDAY OF THE PUBLICAN
AND THE PHARISEE
After the Matins Gospel, Eighth Tone:
T
he doors of repentance do Thou
open to me, 0 Giver of life, for my
spirit waketh at dawn toward Thy holy
temple, bearing a temple of the body
all defiled. But in Thy compassion,
cleanse it by the loving-kindness of Thy
mercy.
Theotokion: Guide me in the paths of
salvation, 0 Theotokos, for I have
defiled my soul with shameful sins, and
have wasted all my life in slothfulness,
but by thine intercessions deliver me
from all uncleanness. 
-167-
Sixth Tone: Have mercy on me, 0
God, according to Thy great mercy;
and according to the multitude of Thy
compassions, blot out my transgression.
When I think of the multitude of
evil things I have done, I, a wretched
one, I tremble at the fearful day of
judgment; but trusting in the mercy of
Thy loving-kindness, like David do I
cry unto Thee: Have mercy on me, 0
God, according to Thy great mercy.
[Note: These penitential songs the Church chanteth
on the Sunday of the Publican and the Pharisee and
the Sundays thereafter through the Fifth Sunday of
Great Lent.]
Kontakion, Fourth Tone: Let us flee
the bragging of the Pharisee, and learn
the humility of the Publican, while crying out unto the Saviour with groanings: Be gracious unto us, 0 Thou
Who alone dost readily forgive. 
-168-
THE SUNDAY
OF THE PRODIGAL SON
Kontakion, Third Tone: Having foolishly abandoned Thy paternal glory, I
squandered on vices the wealth which
Thou gavest me. Wherefore, I cry unto
Thee with the voice of the Prodigal: I
have sinned before Thee, 0 compassionate Father. Receive me as one
repentant, and make me as one of Thy
hired servants.
MEAT-FARE SATURDAY
Troparion, Eighth Tone: 0 Thou Who
by the depth of Thy wisdom, dost provide all things out of love for mankind,
and grantest unto all that which is
profitable, 0 only Creator: Grant rest,
0 Lord, to the souls of Thy servants,
for in Thee have they placed their
hope, 0 our Creator and Fashioner
and God. 
-169-
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: With the
saints give rest, 0 Christ, to the souls of
Thy servants, where there is neither
sickness, nor sorrow, nor sighing, but
life everlasting.
MEAT-FARE SUNDAY
Kontakion, First Tone: When Thou, 0
God, shalt come to earth with glory,
and all things tremble, and the river of
fire floweth before the Judgment Seat
and the books are opened, and the
hidden things made public, then deliver me from the unquenchable fire and
deem me worthy to stand at Thy right
hand, 0 most righteous Judge.
CHEESE-FARE SATURDAY
Troparion, Fourth Tone: 0 God of our
fathers, Who ever dealest with us
according to Thy kindness, take not
Thy mercy from us, but through their
intercessions guide our life in peace. 
-170-
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: Thou hast
made the assembly of the God-bearers
illustrious as preachers of piety and
silencers of ungodliness, 0 Lord, and
they shine upon the world. By their
supplications keep in perfect peace
them that glorify and magnify Thee,
that they may chant and sing unto
Thee: Alleluia.
CHEESE-FARE SUNDAY
Kontakion, Sixth Tone: 0 Thou guide
unto wisdom, bestower of prudence,
instructor of the foolish and defender
of the poor: Establish and grant
understanding unto my heart, 0
Master. Grant me speech, 0 Word of
the Father; for behold, I shall not keep
my lips from crying unto Thee: 0
Merciful One, have mercy on me who
have fallen. 
-171-
The Prayer of St. Ephraim the Syrian:
0 Lord and Master of my life, a
spirit of idleness, despondency, ambition, and idle talking give me not.
Prostration.
But rather a spirit of chastity, humble-mindedness, patience, and love
bestow upon me Thy servant. Prostration.
Yea, 0 Lord King, grant me to see
my failings and not condemn my
brother; for blessed art Thou unto the
ages of ages. Amen. Prostration.
0 God, cleanse me a sinner, (twelve
times, with a reverence each time, and then
repeat the entire prayer:)
0 Lord and Master- of my life .... and
the rest, with a prostration at the end.
{Note: This prayer is read at the hours of
Wednesday and Friday of Cheese-Fare Week
and in all of the Holy Great Lent, except on
Saturdays and Sundays.] 
-172-
THE FIRST WEEK OF GREAT LENT
Kontakion of the Great Canon, Sixth
Tone: My soul, my soul, arise! Why
sleepest thou? The end draweth nigh,
and thou shalt be confounded; arouse
thyself, then, that Christ God may
spare thee, Who is everywhere present
and filleth all things.
FIRST SATURDAY OF GREAT LENT
Troparion, Second Tone: Great are
the achievements of faith! In the fountain of flame as in refreshing water, the
holy martyr Theodore rejoiced; for
having been made a whole-burnt offering in the fire, he was offered as sweet
bread unto the Trinity. By his prayers, 0 Christ God, save our souls. jKontakion, Eighth Tone: Having received the Faith of Christ in thy
heart as a breastplate, thou didst trample upon the enemy hosts, 0 great 
-173-
champion; and thou hast been
crowned eternally with a heavenly
crown, as thou art invincible.
FIRST SUNDAY OF GREAT LENT
Troparion, Second Tone: We worship
Thine immaculate Icon, 0 Good One,
asking the forgiveness of our failings,
0 Christ God; for of Thine Own will
Thou wast well-pleased to ascend the
Cross in the flesh, that Thou mightest
deliver from slavery to the enemy those
whom Thou hadst fashioned. Wherefore, we cry to Thee thankfully: Thou
didst fill all things with joy, 0 our
Saviour, when Thou earnest to save the
world.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: The Uncircumscribable Word of the Father was
circumscribed when He took flesh of
thee, 0 Theotokos; and when He had
restored the defiled image to its ancient state, He suffused it with divine 
-174-
beauty. As for us, confessing our salvation, we record it in deed and word.
THE SECOND SUNDAY
OF GREAT LENT
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Light of
Orthodoxy, pillar and teacher of the
Church, adornment of monastics,
invincible champion of theologians, 0
Gregory, thou wonderworker, boast of
Thessalonica, herald of grace, ever
pray that our souls be saved.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: 0 sacred and
divine organ of wisdom, clear trumpet
of theology: we praise thee with one
accord, 0 Gregory of divine speech;
but as a mind standing before the
Primordial Mind, direct our mind to
Him, 0 father, that we may cry:
Rejoice, 0 herald of grace!
Kontakion of the Sunday, Fourth Tone:
The season of the virtues hath now
been revealed, and judgment is at the 
-175-
doors; therefore let us arise and keep
the Fast, offering tears of compunction
together with our alms, and let us cry:
Our sins are more than the sands of
the sea; but do Thou pardon us, 0
Creator of all, that we may receive
incorruptible crowns.
THE THIRD SUNDAY
OF GREAT LENT
The Veneration of the Cross
Troparion, First Tone: Save, 0 Lord,
Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance; grant Thou unto Orthodox
Christians victory over enemies; and by
the power of Thy Cross do Thou preserve Thy commonwealth.
Kontakion, Fourth · Tone: 0 Thou
Who wast lifted up willingly on the
Cross, bestow Thy mercies upon the
new community named after Thee, 0
Christ God; gladden with Thy power
the Orthdox Christians, granting them 
-176-
victory over enemies; may they have as
Thy help the weapon of peace, the
invincible trophy.
Another Kontakion, Seventh Tone: No
longer doth the flaming sword guard
the gate of Eden, for a strange extinction hath come upon it, even the Tree
of the Cross. The sting hath been
taken from death, and the victory from
hades. And Thou, my Saviour, didst
appear unto those in hades, saying:
Enter ye again into Paradise.
THE FOURTH SUNDAY
OF GREAT LENT
Saint John of the Ladder
Troparion, Third Tone: Having raised
up a sacred ladder by thy words, thou
wast shown forth unto all as a teacher
of monastics, and thou dost lead us, 0
John, from the purification that
cometh through godly discipline unto
the light of divine vision. 0 righteous 
-177-
father, do thou entreat Christ God that
we be granted great mercy.
Kontakion, First Tone: Offering teachings from thy book as everblossoming fruits, 0 wise one, thou
dost sweeten the hearts of them that
attend to them with vigilance, 0
blessed one; for it is a ladder that, from
earth unto the heavenly and abiding
glory, doth lead the souls of those who
with faith do honour thee.
THE FIFrH SATURDAY
OF GREAT LENT
The Laudation of the Theotokos
Troparion, Eighth Tone: When the
bodiless one learned the secret command, in haste he came and stood
before Joseph's dwelling, and spake
unto the Maiden who knew not wedlock: The One Who hath bowed the
heavens by His descent is held and
contained, unchanging, wholly in 
-178-
thee. Seeing Him receiving the form
of a servant in thy womb, I stand in awe
and cry to thee: Rejoice, thou Bride
Unwedded!
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: To thee, the
champion leader, we thy servants dedicate a feast of victory and of thanksgiving, as ones rescued out of sufferings,
0 Theotokos; but as thou art one with
might which is invincible, from all
dangers that can be do thou deliver us,
that we may cry to thee: Rejoice, thou
Bride Unwedded!
THE FIFfH SUNDAY
OF GREAT LENT
Saint Mary of Egypt
Troparion, Fifth Tone: Enlightened by
the grace of the Cross, thou wast
shown forth as a radiant lamp of
repentance, dispelling the darkness of
the passions, 0 all-holy one. Wherefore, thou didst appear as an angel in 
-179-
the flesh unto the sacred Zosimas in
the wilderness, 0 Mary, our righteous
mother, do thou intercede with Christ
for us.
Kontakion, Third Tone: Thou who
once of old wast filled with all manner
of fornication, art now seen today to be
a bride of Christ by thy repentance.
Thou didst love and emulate the life of
the angels. By the Cross thou didst
annihilate the hordes of demons; for
this cause thou art a bride now in the
kingdom of the heavens, 0 Mary, thou
all-modest one.
Another Kontakion, Fourth Tone:
Having escaped the darkness of sin,
and having illumin~d thy heart with
the light of repentance, 0 glorious
one, thou didst come to Christ and
didst offer to Him His immaculate and
holy Mother as a merciful intercessor.
Hence, thou hast found remission of 
-180-
thy transgressions, and thou ever
rejoicest with the angels.
LAZARUS SATURDAY
Troparion, First Tone: In confirming
the common Resurrection, 0 Christ
God, Thou didst raise up Lazarus from
the dead before Thy Passion.
Wherefore, we also, like the children
bearing the symbols of victory, cry to
Thee, the Vanquisher of death:
Hosanna in the highest; blessed is He
that cometh in the name of the Lord.
Kontakion, Second Tone: Christ, the
Joy of all, the Truth, the Light, the Life,
the Resurrection of the world, hath, of
His goodness, appeared to those on
earth and become the archetype of the
Resurrection, granting divine forgiveness unto all. 
-181-
THE ENTRY OF THE LORD
INTO JERUSALEM,
PALM SUNDAY
Troparion, First Tone: In confirming
the common Resurrection... [See the
Troparion for Lazarus Saturday].
Another Troparion, Fourth Tone:
As by baptism we were buried with
Thee, 0 Christ our God, so by Thy
Resurrection we were deemed worthy
of immortal life; and praising Thee, we
cry: Hosanna in the highest; blessed is
He that cometh in the name of the
Lord.
Kontakion, Sixth Tone: Being borne
upon a throne in heaven, and upon a
colt on the earth, 0 Christ God, Thou
didst accept the praise of the angels
and the laudation of the children as
they cry to Thee: Blessed is He that
cometh to recall Adam. 
-182-
PASSION WEEK TROPARIA
HOLY AND GREAT MONDAY
At Matins:
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Behold, the
Bridegroom cometh at midnight, and
blessed is that servant whom He shall
find watching; but unworthy is he
whom He shall find heedless. Beware,
therefore, 0 my soul, lest thou be
weighed down with sleep; lest thou be
given up to death, and be shut out
from the kingdom. But rouse thyself
and cry: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, 0
God; through the Theotokos, have
mercy on us. Thrice.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone:
Jacob lamented the loss of Joseph, but 
-183-
that noble one was seated in a chariot
and honoured as a king; for by not
being enslaved then to the pleasures of
the Egyptian woman, he was glorified
by Him that beholdeth the hearts of
men, and that bestoweth an incorruptible crown.
HOLY AND GREAT TUESDAY
At Matins:
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Behold, the
Bridegroom cometh... [See Monday,
above].
Kontakion, Second Tone:
Having realized the hour of the end, 0
my soul, and having feared at the cutting down of the fig tree, labour with
the talent that was 0 given thee, 0 hapless one, and be watchful and cry: Let
us not remain outside the bridal-chamber of Christ. 
-184-
HOLY AND GREAT WEDNESDAY
At Matins:
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Behold, the
Bridegroom cometh ... [See Monday].
Kontakion, Second Tone: Having
transgressed more than the harlot, 0
Good One, I have in no wise brought
forth streams of tears for Thee; but in
silence I supplicate Thee and fall down
before Thee, kissing Thine immaculate feet with love, so that, as Master
that Thou art, Thou mayest grant me
the forgiveness of debts, as I cry to
Thee, 0 Saviour: From the mire of my
deeds do Thou deliver me.
HOLY AND GREAT THURSDAY
At Matins:
Troparion, Eighth Tone: When the
glorious disciples were enlightened at
the washing of the feet, then Judas the
ungodly one was stricken and darkened with the love of silver. And unto 
-185-
the lawless judges did he deliver Thee,
the righteous Judge. Behold, 0 lover
of money, him that for the sake thereof did hang himself; flee from that
insatiable soul that dared such things
against the Master. 0 Thou Who art
good unto all, Lord, glory be to Thee.
Kontakion, Second Tone: Taking the
bread into his hands, the betrayer
stretcheth them forth secretly and
receiveth the price of Him that, with
His Own hands, fashioned, man. And
Judas, the servant and deceiver,
remained incorrigible.
HOLY AND GREAT FRIDAY
Troparion, Eighth Tone: When the
glorious disciples ... [See Thursday].
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: Come, let us
all praise Him Who was crucified for
us, for Mary beheld Him on the Tree,
and said: Though Thou endurest the
Cross, Thou art my Son and my God. 
-186-
HOLY AND GREAT SATURDAY
At Vespers and Saturday Matins:
Troparia, Second Tone: The noble
Joseph, having taken Thy most pure
Body down from the Tree and
wrapped It in pure linen and covered
It with spices, laid It in a new tomb.
When Thou didst descend unto
death, 0 Life Immortal, then didst
Thou slay hades with the lightning of
Thy divinity. And when Thou didst
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, all the Hosts of the heavens cried out: 0 Life-giver, Christ our
God, glory be to Thee.
Unto the Myrrh-bearing Women did
the angel cry out as he stood by the
grave: Myrrh is meet for the dead, but
Christ hath proved a stranger to corruption.
Kontakion, Second Tone: He that shut
up the abyss is seen as one dead, and 
-187-
like a mortal, the Immortal One is
wrapped in linen and myrrh, and
placed in a grave. And women came to
anoint Him, weeping bitterly and crying out: This is the most blessed
Sabbath day wherein Christ, having
slept, shall arise on the third day.
,. 
-188-
PAS CHA
PROCESSIONAL HYMN
Sixth (Sticheron) Tone:
Thy Resurrection, 0 Christ Saviour,
the angels hymn in the heavens;
vouchsafe also us on earth with pure
hearts to glorify Thee.
Paschal Troparion:
C
hrist is risen from the dead,
trampling down death by
death, and on those in the tombs
bestowing life. 
-189-
The Paschal Canon, First Tone:
ODE I
Eirmos: It is the Day of Resurrection, let us
be radiant, 0 ye people; Pascha, the Lord's
Pascha: for from death to life, and from earth
to heaven, Christ God hath brought us, as we
sing the hymn of victory.
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead.
Let us purify our senses, and we shall
behold Christ, radiant with the unapproachable light of the Resurrection,
and we shall hear Him say, Rejoice!, as
we sing the hymn of victory.
Let the heavens be glad as is meet,
and let the earth rejoice, and let the
whole world both visible and invisible,
keep festival: for Christ is risen, 0 gladness eternal.
Katavasia: It is the Day of Resurrection ....
ODE III
Eirmos: Come, let us drink a new drink,
not one miraculously brought forth from a
barren rock, but the Fountain oflncorruption, 
-190-
springing forth from the tomb of Christ, in
Whom we are strengthened.
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead.
Now all things are filled with light;
heaven and earth, and the nethermost
parts of the earth; let all creation,
therefore, celebrate the arising of
Christ, whereby it is strengthened.
Yesterday I was buried with Thee, 0
Christ; today I rise with Thine arising.
Yesterday I was crucified with Thee; do
Thou Thyself glorify me with Thee, 0
Saviour, in Thy kingdom.
Katavasia: Come, let us drink ....
The Hypakoe, Eighth Tone:
F
orestalling the dawn, the women
came with Mary, and found the
stone rolled away from the sepulchre,
and heard from the angel: Why seek ye
among the dead, as though He were
mortal, Him Who liveth in everlasting
light? Behold the grave-clothes. Go 
-191-
quickly and proclaim to the world that
the Lord is risen and hath slain death.
For He is the Son of God Who saveth
mankind.
ODE IV
Eirmos: On divine watch let the Godinspired Abbachum stand with us, and show
forth the light-bearing angel clearly saying:
Today salvation is come to the world, for Christ
is risen as Almighty.
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead.
As a man-child did Christ appear
when He came forth from the Virgin's
womb, and as a mortal was He called
the Lamb. Without blemish also, for
He tasted no defilement, is our Pascha;
and as true God, perfect was He proclaimed.
Like unto a yearling lamb, Christ,
our blessed Crown, of His own will was
sacrificed for all, a Pascha of purification; and from the tomb the beautiful
Sun of Righteousness shone forth 
-192-
again upon us.
David, the ancestor of God, danced
with leaping before the symbolical Ark;
let us also, the holy people of God,
beholding the fulfillment of the symbols, be divinely glad; for Christ is risen
as Almighty.
Katavasia: On divine watch ....
ODE V
Eirmos: Let us awake in the deep dawn,
and instead of myrrh, offer a hymn to the
Master, and we shall see Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, Who causeth life to dawn for
all.
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead.
Seeing Thy boundless compassion,
they who were held in the bonds of
hades hastened to the light, 0 Christ,
with gladsome feet, praising the
Pascha eternal.
Bearing lights, let us approach
Christ, Who cometh forth from the
tomb like a bridegroom, and with the 
-193-
feast-loving ranks of angels, let us celebrate the saving Pascha of God.
Katavasia: Let us awake ....
ODE VI
Eirmos: Thou didst descend into the
nethermost parts of the earth, and didst shatter the eternal bars that held the fettered, 0
Christ, and on the third day, like Jonah from
the whale, Thou didst arise from the tomb.
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead.
Having kept the seals intact, 0
Christ, Thou didst rise from the tomb,
0 Thou Who didst not break the seal
of the Virgin by Thy birth, and Thou
hast opened for us the doors of
Paradise.
0 my Saviour, the !iving and unslain
Sacrifice, when as God, Thou, of Thine
Own will, hadst offered up Thyself
unto the Father, Thou didst raise up
with Thyself the whole race of Adam,
when Thou didst rise from the tomb.
Katavasia: Thou didst descend .... 
-194-
Kontakion, Eighth Tone:
T
hough Thou didst descend into
the grave, 0 Immortal One, yet
didst Thou destroy the power of hades.
And didst arise as victor, 0 Christ God,
calling to the myrrh-bearing women:
Rejoice! and giving peace unto Thine
apostles: Thou Who dost grant resurrection to the fallen.
Ekos:
T
he myrrh-bearing maidens forestalled the dawn, seeking, as it
were day, the Sun that was before the
sun and Who had once set in the tomb,
and they cried out one to another: 0
friends! come, let us anoint with spices
the life-bringing and buried Body, the
Flesh that raised up fallen Adam, that
now lieth in the tomb. Let us go, let us
hasten, like the Magi, and let us worship and offer myrrh as a gift to Him
Who is wrapped now not in swaddling 
-195-
clothes but in a shroud. And let us
weep and cry aloud: 0 Master, arise,
Thou Who dost grant resurrection to
the fallen.
Then we chant:
H
aving beheld the Resurrection of
Christ, let us worship the holy
Lord Jesus, the only Sinless One. We
worship Thy Cross, 0 Christ, and Thy
holy Resurrection we hymn and glorify; for Thou art our God, and we know
none other beside Thee, we call upon
Thy name. 0 come, all ye faithful, let
us worship Christ's holy Resurrection,
for behold, through the Cross joy hath
come to all the world. Ever blessing
the Lord, we hymn Bis Resurrection;
for, having endured crucifixion, He
hath destroyed death by death. Thrice.
J
esus, having risen from the grave
as He foretold, hath given us life
eternal and great mercy. Thrice. 
-196-
ODE VII
Eirmos: He Who delivered the Children
from the furnace, became man, suffereth as a
mortal, and through His Passion doth clothe
mortality with the beauty of incorruption. He
is the only blessed and most glorious God of
our fathers.
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead.
The godly-wise women with myrrh
followed after Thee in haste; but Him
Whom they sought with tears as dead,
they worshipped joyfully as the living
God, and they brought unto Thy disciples, 0 Christ, the good tidings of the
mystical Pascha.
We celebrate the death of death, the
destruction of hades, the beginning of
another life eternal, and leaping for
joy, we hymn the Cause, the only
blessed and most glorious God of our
fathers.
For truly sacred and all-festive is this
saving night, and this shining, light-
-197-
bearing day, the harbinger of the
Resurrection, whereon the Timeless
Light bodily from the tomb upon all
hath shined.
ODE VIII
Eirmos: This is the chosen and holy day,
the one king and lord of sabbaths, the feast of
feasts, and the triumph of triumphs, on which
we bless Christ unto the ages.
Refrain: Christ is risen from the dead.
Come, on this auspicious day of the
Resurrection, let us partake of the fruit
of the new vine of divine gladness of
the kingdom of Christ, praising Him as
God unto the ages.
Lift up thine eyes about thee, 0 Sion,
and see, for behold, there cometh unto
thee like God-illumined beacons, from
the west, and from the north, and from
the sea, and from the east, thy children,
in thee blessing Christ unto the ages.
Refrain: 0 Most Holy Trinity, our God,
glory to Thee. 
-198-
0 Father Almighty, and Word, and
Spirit, one Nature united in three Persons, transcendent and most divine!
Into Thee have we been baptized, and
Thee will we bless unto all ages.
ODE IX
Refrain: Magnify, 0 my soul, Christ the
Giver of life, Who rose from the grave on the
third day.
Eirmos: Shine, shine, 0 new Jerusalem, for
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; dance
now and be glad, 0 Sion, and do thou exult, 0
pure Theotokos, in the arising of Him, Whom
thou didst bear.
Refrain: Magnify, 0 my soul, Him Who
willingly suffered, and was buried, and rose
from the grave on the third day.
Shine, shine, ....
Refrain: Christ is the new Pascha, the living Sacrifice, the Lamb of God that taketh
away the sin of the world.
Shine, shine, ....
Refrain: The angel cried unto her that is
full of grace: 0 pure Virgin, rejoice! and again
I say, Rejoice! for thy Son is risen from the 
-199-
grave on the third day, and hath raised the
dead, 0 ye people, be joyful!
Shine, shine, ....
Refrain: Having slept, Thou didst awake
the dead of the ages, roaring royally as the
Lion of Judah.
0 how divine, how loving, how
sweet is Thy voice! For Thou hast truly
promised to be with us unto the end of
the age, 0 Christ; having this foundation of hope, we faithful rejoice.
Refrain: Mary Magdalene ran to the sepulchre, and having seen Christ, she questioned
Him as though He were the gardener.
0 how divine, how loving, ... repeat.
Refrain: The shining angel to the women
cried: Cease from tears, for Christ is risen.
0 how divine, how loving, ... repeat.
Refrain: Christ is risen, trampling down
death, and raising the dead, 0 ye people, be
joyful.
0 how divine, how loving, ... repeat.
Refrain: Today all creation is glad and
rejoiceth, for Christ is risen, and hades is led in
captivity. 
-200-
0 great and most sacred Pascha,
Christ! 0 Wisdom and Word of God
and Power! Grant us more perfectly to
partake of Thee, in the unwaning day
of Thy kingdom.
Refrain: Today the Master hath led hades
captive, and raised the fettered, whom from
ages it had held in bitter bondage.
0 great and most sacred Pascha, ....
Refrain: Magnify, 0 my soul, the dominion
of the Tri-hypostatic and Indivisible Godhead.
0 great and most sacred Pascha, ....
Refrain: Rejoice, 0 Virgin, rejoice; rejoice,
0 blessed one; rejoice, 0 most glorified one:
for thy Son is risen on the third day from the
grave.
0 great and most sacred Pascha, ....
Refrain: Magnify, 0 my soul, Christ the
Giver of life, Who rose from the grave on the
third day.
Katavasia: Shine, shine, .... 
-201-
Exaposteilarion, Third Tone:
H
aving fallen asleep in the flesh, as
a mortal, 0 King and Lord, on
the third day Thou didst rise again,
raising up Adam from corruption, and
abolishing death: 0 Pascha of incorruption, salvation of the world! Thrice.
At LAUDS, in the First Tone:
Stichos: Praise Him for His mighty acts,
praise Him according to the multitude of His
greatness.
We hymn, 0 Christ, Thy saving
Passion, and glorify Thy Resurrection.
Stichos: Praise Him with the sound of
trumpet, praise Him with psaltery and harp.
0 Thou Who didst endure the
Cross, and didst abolish death, and
didst rise again from the dead: Make
our life peaceful, 0 Lord, for Thou
alone art almighty.
Stichos: Praise Him with timbrel and
dance, praise Him with strings and flute. 
-202-
0 Thou Who didst lead hades captive, and didst raise up man by Thy
Resurrection, deem us worthy, with
pure hearts, to hymn and glorify Thee.
Stichos: Praise Him with tuneful cymbals,
praise Him with cymbals of jubilation. Let
every breath praise the Lord.
Glorifying Thy Godly-majestic condescension, we hymn Thee, 0 Christ;
for Thou wast born of a Virgin, yet
Thou didst remain inseparable from
the Father; Thou didst suffer as a man,
and willingly didst endure the Cross;
Thou didst rise from the tomb, coming
forth as from a bridal chamber, that
Thou mightest save the world: 0 Lord,
glory be to Thee.
PASCHAL STICHERA, Fifth Tone:
Stichos: Let God arise and let His enemies
be scattered.
A Pascha sacred today hath been
shown unto us; a Pascha new and holy,
a Pascha mystical, a Pascha all-venera-
-203-
ble ! A Pascha that is Christ the Redeemer; a Pascha immaculate, a great
Pascha; a Pascha of the faithful; a Pascha
that hath opened the gates of Paradise
to us; a Pascha that doth sanctify all the
faithful.
Stichos: As smoke vanisheth, so let them
vanish.
Come from the vision, 0 ye women,
bearers of good tidings, and say ye
unto Sion: Receive from us the good
tidings of the Resurrection of Christ;
adorn thyself, exult, and rejoice, 0
Jerusalem, for thou hast seen Christ
the King, like a bridegroom come
forth from the tomb.
Stichos: So let sinn<c:rs perish at the presence of God, and let the righteous be glad.
The myrrh-bearing women in the
deep dawn stood before the tomb of
the Giver of life; they found an angel
sitting upon the stone, and he, speaking to them, said thus: Why seek ye the 
-204-
Living among the dead? Why mourn
ye the Incorruptible amid corruption?
Go, proclaim unto His disciples.
Stichos: This is the day which the Lord
hath made; let us rejoice and be glad therein.
Pascha the beautiful, Pascha, the
Lord's Pascha, the Pascha all-venerable
hath dawned upon us. Pascha, with joy
let us embrace one another. 0 Pascha!
ransom from sorrow, for from the
tomb today, as from a bridal chamber,
hath Christ shone forth, and hath
filled the women with joy, saying:
Proclaim unto the apostles.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
It is the Day of Resurrection, let us
be radiant for the feast, and let us
embrace one another. Let us say,
Brethren, even to them that hate us,
let us forgive all things on the
Resurrection, and thus let us cry out: 
-205-
Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and on
those in the tombs bestowing life.
Then: Christ is risen from the dead,
tramping down death by death, and on
those in the tombs bestowing life!
Thrice. 
-206-
THE HOURS OF HOLY PASCHA
If there be a priest: Blessed is our God ....
But a layman saith: Through the prayers
of our holy fathers, 0 Lord Jesus Christ our
God, have mercy on us. Amen.
Christ is risen from the dead, trampling down death by death, and on
those in the tombs bestowing life.
Thrice. Then we chant thrice:
Having beheld the Resurrection of
Christ, let us worship the holy Lord
Jesus, the only Sinless One. We worship Thy Cross, 0 Christ, and Thy holy
Resurrection we hymn and glorify; for
Thou art our God, and we know none
other beside Thee, we call upon Thy
name. 0 come, all ye faithful, let us
worship Christ's holy Resurrection, for
behold, through the Cross joy hath
come to all the world. Ever blessing
the Lord, we hymn His Resurrection;
for, having endured crucifixion, He
hath destroyed death by death. Thrice. 
-207-
The Hypakoe, Eighth Tone, once:
Forestalling the dawn, the women
came with Mary, and found the stone
rolled away from the sepulchre, and
heard from the angel: Why seek ye
among the dead, as though He were
mortal, Him Who liveth in everlasting
light? Behold the grave-clothes. Go
quickly and proclaim to the world that
the Lord is risen and hath slain death.
For He is the Son of God Who saveth
mankind.
The Kontakion, Eighth Tone, once:
Though Thou didst descend into
the grave, 0 Immortal One, yet didst
Thou destroy the power of hades. And
didst arise as victor, 0-Christ God, calling to the myrrh-bearing women:
Rejoice! and giving peace unto Thine
apostles: Thou Who dost grant resurrection to the fallen. 
-208-
And these Troparia, once:
In the grave bodily, but in hades
with Thy soul as God; in Paradise with
the thief, and on the throne with the
Father and the Spirit wast Thou Who
fillest all things, 0 Christ the Inexpressible.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
How life-giving, how much more
beautiful than Paradise, and truly
more resplendent than any royal
palace was Thy tomb shown to be, 0
Christ, the source of our resurrection.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
0 sanctified and divine tabernacle
of the Most High, rejoice! For through
thee, 0 Theotokos,joy is given to them
that cry: Blessed art thou among
women, 0 all-spotless Lady.
Lord, have mercy. Forty times.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, 
-209-
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
More honourable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, who without
corruption gavest birth to God the
Word, the very Theotokos, thee do we
magnify.
In the name of the Lord, Father
(Master), bless.
Priest: Through the prayers of our
holy fathers, 0 Lord Jesus Christ our
God, have mercy on us.
And we say: Amen. And we chant
thrice: Christ is risen .... Glory, both now.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice. Bless.
And the dismissal by the priest.
But a layman saith: 0 Lord Jesus
Christ our God, for the sake of the
intercessions of Thy most pure
Mother, of our holy and God-bearing
fathers, and all the saints, have mercy
on us. Amen. 
- 210-
Troparia and Kontakia
from the Pentecostarion
FRIDAY OF BRIGHT WEEK
The Life-giving Spring
Troparion, Third Tone: As a lifegiving fount, thou didst conceive the
Dew that is transcendent in essence, 0
Virgin Maid. And thou didst pour
forth for us the Immortal Nectar. And
as ever-flowing streams from thy
fountain, thou broughtest forth the
Water that springeth up unto life
everlasting; wherein, taking delight, we
all cry out: Rejoice, 0 life-bearing
fount. 
-211-
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: From thine
unfailing fount, 0 Maiden full of
grace, thou dost reward me by pouring
forth of the unending streams of thy
grace that passeth human understanding. And since thou didst bear the
Word incomprehensibly, I entreat thee
to refresh me with thy grace divine,
that I may cry to thee: Rejoice, 0 water
of salvation.
THOMAS SUNDAY
Troparion, Seventh Tone: While the
tomb was sealed, Thou, 0 Life, didst
shine forth from the grave, 0 Christ
God. And while the doors were shut,
. Thou didst come unto Thy disciples, 0
Resurrection of all, renewing through
them an upright Spirit in us according
to Thy great mercy.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: With his
searching right hand, Thomas did
probe Thy life-bestowing side, 0 Christ 
-212-
God; for when Thou didst enter while
the doors were shut, he cried out unto
Thee with the rest of the disciples:
Thou art my Lord and my God.
SUNDAY OF THE
MYRRH-BEARING WOMEN
Troparion, Second Tone: When Thou
didst descend unto death, 0 Life
Immortal, then didst Thou slay hades
with the lightning of Thy Divinity.
And when Thou didst also raise the
dead out of the nethermost depths, all
the Hosts of the heavens cried out: 0
Life-giver, Christ our God, glory be to
Thee.
The noble Joseph, taking Thine
immaculate Body down from the Tree,
and having wrapped It in pure linen
and spices, laid It in a new tomb. But
on the third day Thou didst arise, 0
Lord, granting to the world great
mercy. 
-213-
Unto the myrrh-bearing women did
the angel cry out as he stood by the
tomb: Myrrh is meet for the dead, but
Christ hath proved to be a stranger to
corruption. But cry out: The Lord is
risen, granting to the world great
mercy.
Kontakion, Second Tone: When Thou
didst cry. Rejoice, unto the myrrh-bearers, Thou didst make the lamentation
of Eve the first mother to cease by Thy
Resurrection, 0 Christ God. And Thou
didst bid Thine apostles to preach:
, The Saviour is risen from the grave.
SUNDAY OF THE PARALYTIC
Kontakion, Third Tone: As of old Thou
didst raise the paralytic, 0 Lord, by
Thy Divine presence, raise my soul,
which is paralyzed grievously by all
manner of sins and unseemly deeds,
that being saved I may cry out: 0 compassionate Christ, glory be to Thy
power. 
-214-
MID-PENTECOST WEDNESDAY
Troparion, Eighth Tone: In the midst
of the Feast, give Thou my thirsty soul
to drink of the waters of piety; for
Thou, 0 Saviour, didst cry out to all:
Whosoever is thirsty, let him come to
Me and drink. Wherefore, 0 Wellspring of life, Christ our God, glory be
to Thee.
Kontakion, Fourth Tone: In the midst
of the Judaic feast, Thou didst say to
those present, 0 Christ God, Master
and Creator of all: Come ye and
receive the Water of immortality.
Wherefore, we fall down before Thee,
crying out in faith and saying: Grant us
Thy mercy and compassion; for Thou
art the Well-spring of our life.
SUNDAY OF
THE SAMARITAN WOMAN
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: Having
come to the well in faith, the Samari-
-215-
tan woman saw Thee, the Water of
Wisdom, whereof having drunk abundantly, she, the renowned one, inherited the kingdom on high forever.
SUNDAY OF THE BLIND MAN
Kontakion, Fourth Tone: Blinded in
the eyes of my soul, I draw nigh unto
Thee, 0 Christ, like the man blind
from his birth, and in repentance I cry
to Thee: Thou art the exceeding radiant Light of those in darkness.
THE ASCENSION OF THE LORD
Troparion, Fourth Tone: Thou hast
ascended in glory, 0 Christ our God,
having gladdened Thy disciples with
the promise of the Holy Spirit; and
they were assured by-the blessing that
Thou art the Son of God, the
Redeemer of the world.
Kontakion, Sixth Tone: When Thou
didst fulfill Thy dispensation for our
sake, uniting things on earth with the 
-216-
heavens, Thou didst ascend in glory, 0
Christ our God, departing not hence,
but remaining inseparable from us,
and crying unto them that love Thee: I
am with you, and no one shall be
against you.
THE SUNDAY OF THE
HOLY FATHERS OF THE
FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCIL
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Most glorified
art Thou, 0 Christ our God, Who hast
established our holy fathers as luminous stars upon the earth, and
through them didst guide us all to the
true Faith. 0 Most-merciful One, glory
be to Thee.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: The preaching of the apostles and the doctrines of
the fathers confirmed the one Faith of
the Church. And wearing the garment
of truth, woven from the theology on
high, She rightly divideth and glorifieth the great mystery of piety. 
-217-
PENTECOST SUNDAY
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Blessed art
Thou, 0 Christ our God, Who hast
shown forth the fishermen as supremely wise, by sending down upon them
the Holy Spirit, and through them
didst draw the world into Thy net. 0
Lover of mankind, glory be to Thee.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: Once, when
He descended and confounded the
tongues, the Most High divided the
nations; and when He divided the
tongues of fire, He called all men into
unity; and with one accord we glorify
the All-Holy Spirit.
SUNDAY OF ALL SAINTS
Troparion, Fourth Tone: Adorned in
the blood of Thy martyrs throughout
all the world, as in purple and fine
linen. Thy Church, through them doth
cry unto Thee, 0 Christ God: Send
down Thy compassions upon Thy peo-
-218-
ple; grant peace to Thy flock and to
our souls great mercy.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: To Thee, the
Planter of creation, the world doth
offer the God-bearing martyrs as the
firstfruits of nature. By their intercessions preserve Thy Church, Thy commonwealth, in profound peace,
through the Theotokos, 0 Greatlymerciful One.
SECOND SUNDAY AFfER
PENTECOST
ALL SAINTS OF RUSSIA
Troparion, Eighth Tone: As a beautiful
fruit of the sowing of Thy salvation, the
land of Russia doth offer to Thee, 0
Lord, all the saints that have shone in
her. By their intercessions preserve the
Church and our land in profound
peace, through the Theotokos, 0
Greatly-merciful One. 
-219-
Kontakion, Third Tone: Today the
choir of the saints who pleased God in
the land of Russia doth stand before us
in church and invisibly doth pray for us
to God. With them the angels glorify
Him, and all the saints of the Church
of Christ keep festival with them; and
they all pray together for us to the
Eternal God. 
-220-
A SUPPLICATORY CANON
to our Lord Jesus Christ
Second Tone:
ODE I
Eirmos: In the deep of old the infinite
Power overwhelmed Pharaoh's whole army.
But the incarnate Word annihilated pernicious
sin. Exceedingly glorious is the Lord, for gloriously is He glorified.
Refrain: 0 sweetestjesus, save us.
Sweetest Jesus Christ, long-suffering
Jesus, heal the wounds of my soul,
Jesus, and make sweet my heart, 0
Greatly-merciful One, I pray Thee,
Jesus my Saviour, that being saved by 
-221-
Thee, I may magnify Thee.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
Sweetest Jesus Christ, open to me
the door of repentance, 0 Jesus, Lover
of mankind, and accept me, 0 Jesus
my Saviour, as I fall down before Thee
and fervently implore the forgiveness
of my sins.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
0 sweetest Jesus Christ, Jesus,
snatch me from the hand of deceitful
Belial, 0 Jesus, and make me stand at
the right hand of Thy glory, 0 Jesus my
Saviour, delivering me from the lot of
those on the left.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Theotokion: 0 _Lady who gavest
birth to Jesus our God, pray for us
worthless servants, that by thy prayers,
0 immaculate one, we who are defiled
may be delivered from torment, 0
spotless one, and enjoy everlasting
glory. 
-222-
ODE III
Eirmos: By establishing me on the rock of
faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth over mine
enemies, and my spirit rejoiceth when I sing:
There is none holy as our God, and none
righteous beside Thee, 0 Lord.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
Hearken, 0 my Jesus, Lover of mankind, unto Thy servant calling with
compunction; and deliver me, 0 Jesus,
from condemnation and torment, 0
only long-suffering sweetest Jesus,
plenteous in mercy.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
Receive Thy servant, 0 my Jesus,
who falleth down with tears, 0 my
Jesus, and save me as one repentant, 0
my Jesus, delivering me from Gehenna, 0 Master, sweetestJesus, plenteous
in mercy.
0 sweetest Jesus, save us.
0 my Jesus, the time Thou gavest
me I have squandered in passions, 0
my Jesus. Reject me not, 0 my Jesus, 
-223-
but call me, I pray, 0 Master, sweetest
Jesus, and save me.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Theotokion: 0 Virgin who gavest
birth to my Jesus, implore Him to
deliver me from Gehenna. Thou
alone art the protectress of the afflicted, 0 thou who art full of divine grace.
And vouchsafe me the life that ageth
not, 0 all-blameless one.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
Sedalen: 0 Jesus my Saviour, Thou
didst save the prodigal. Jesus my
Saviour, Thou didst accept the harlot.
And now have mercy ·on me, 0 Jesus
plenteous in mercy; have compassion
and save me, 0 Jesus my Benefactor, as
Thou hadst compassion on Manasseh,
my Jesus, only Lover of mankind. 
-224-
ODE IV
Eirmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come,
not as an ambassador, nor as an angel, but the
very Lord Himself incarnate, and didst save
me, the whole man. Wherefore, I cry to Thee:
Glory to Thy power, 0 Lord.
0 sweetest Jesus, save us.
Heal, 0 my Jesus, the wounds of my
soul, 0 my Jesus, I pray, and snatch me
from the hand of soul-corrupting
Belial, 0 my compassionate Jesus, and
save me.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
I have sinned, 0 my sweetest Jesus;
0 Compassionate One, 0 my Jesus,
save me who flee to Thy protection, 0
long-sufferingJesus, and vouchsafe me
Thy kingdom.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
No one hath sinned, 0 my Jesus, as
have I, the wretched one; but now I fall
down praying: Save me, 0 my Jesus,
and grant me life, 0 my Jesus.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us. 
-225-
Theotokion: 0 all-hymned one,
who gavest birth to the Lord Jesus,
implore Him to deliver from torment
all who hymn thee and call thee truly
the Theotokos.
ODE V
Eirmos: 0 Thou Who art the Light of
those lying in darkness, and the salvation of
the despairing, 0 Christ my Saviour, I rise early
to pray to Thee, 0 King of Peace. Enlighten
me with Thy radiance, for I know none other
God beside Thee.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
Thou art the light of my mind, 0 my
Jesus; Thou art the salvation of my
despairing soul, 0 Saviour. 0 my
Jesus, do Thou deliver me from
torment and Gehenna, as I cry: Save
me, the wretched one, 0 Christ my
Jesus.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
Utterly cast down to shameful passions, 0 my Jesus, I now cry: Stretch
down to me a helping hand, 0 my 
-226-
Jesus, and pluck me out as I cry: Save
me, the wretched one, 0 Christ my
Jesus.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
Carrying about a mind defiled, I call
to Thee, 0 Jesus: Cleanse me from the
dirt of sin, and redeem me who slipped
down to the depths of evil through
ignorance, and save me, 0 Saviour my
Jesus, I pray.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Theotokion: 0 maiden Mother of
God, who gavest birth to Jesus, implore
Him to save all Orthodox monastics
and laity, and to deliver from Gehenna
those who cry: Beside thee we know no
certain protection.
ODE VI
Eirmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin,
I appeal to the unfathomable abyss of Thy
compassion: From corruption raise me up, 0
God.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
0 my Jesus Christ plenteous m 
-227-
mercy, accept me who confess my sins,
0 Master, and save me, 0 Jesus, and
snatch me from corruption, 0 Jesus.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
0 my Jesus, no one else hath been
so prodigal as I, the wretched one, 0
Jesus, Lover of mankind, but do Thou
Thyself save me, 0 Jesus.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
0 my Jesus, with my passions I have
surpassed the harlot and the prodigal,
Manasseh and the publican, 0 my
Jesus, and the robber and the
Ninevites, 0 Jesus.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Theotokion: 0 thou who didst give
birth to my Jesus Chrjst, 0 only undefiled and immaculate Virgin, cleanse
me now, the defiled one, by the hyssop
of thine intercessions.
ODE VII
Eirmos: When the golden image was worshipped in the plain of Dura, Thy three chi!-
-228-
dren despised the godless order. Thrown into
the fire, they were bedewed and sang: Blessed
art Thou, 0 God of our fathers.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
0 Christ Jesus, no one on earth
hath ever sinned, 0 my Jesus, as I, the
wretched one and prodigal, have
sinned. Wherefore, I cry to Thee, my
Jesus, have compassion on me as I sing:
Blessed art Thou, 0 God of our
fathers.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
0 ChristJesus, I cry: Nail me down
with the fear of Thee, 0 my Jesus, and
pilot me to Thy calm haven now, 0 my
compassionate Jesus, that as one saved
I may sing to Thee: Blessed art Thou,
0 God of our fathers.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
0 Christ Jesus, ten thousand times
have I, the passionate one, promised
Thee repentance, 0 my Jesus, but
wretch that I am, I deceived Thee. 
-229-
Wherefore, I cry to Thee, my Jesus:
Enlighten my soul which remaineth
unfeeling; 0 Christ, the God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Theotokion: 0 thou who gavest
birth to Jesus awesomely and above
nature, 0 all-blameless one, implore
Him, 0 Maiden, to forgive me all the
sins that I have committed against my
nature, that as one saved I may cry:
Blessed art thou who didst give birth to
God in the flesh.
ODE VIII
Eirmos: 0 ye works, praise the Lord God,
Who descended into the fiery furnace with the
Hebrew children and changed the flame into
dew, and supremely exalt.Him unto all ages.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
I implore Thee, 0 my Jesus: As
Thou didst redeem the harlot from
many sins, 0 my Jesus, likewise redeem
me, 0 Christ my Jesus, and cleanse my 
-230-
foul soul, 0 my Jesus.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
0 Jesus, having yielded to irrational
pleasures, I have become irrational, 0
my Jesus; and wretch that I am, I have
truly become like unto the beasts, 0
my Saviour. Wherefore, 0 Jesus, deliver me from irrationality.
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
Having fallen, 0 Jesus, into the
hands of soul-corrupting thieves, I
have been stripped now of my divinelywoven garment, 0 my Jesus, and I am
lying all bruised with wounds. 0 my
Christ, do Thou pour on me oil and
wine.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Theotokion: 0 Theotokos Mary,
who ineffably didst carry the Christ, my
Jesus and God: Do thou ever implore
Him to save from perils thy servants
and them that praise thee, 0 Virgin
who knewest not wedlock. 
-231-
ODE IX
Eirmos: God the Word, Who came forth
from God, and Who by ineffable wisdom came
to renew Adam after his grievous fall to corruption through eating, and Who ineffably
took flesh from the holy Virgin for our sake,
Him do we the faithful with one accord magnify with hymns.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
I have surpassed, 0 my Jesus,
Manasseh and the publican, the harlot
and the prodigal, 0 compassionate
Jesus, and the robber, 0 my Jesus,
through all my shameful and unseemly deeds, 0 Jesus; but do Thou forestall
me, 0 my Jesus, and save me.
0 sweetestjesus, save us.
By my passions, 0 my Jesus, have I,
the wretched one, surpassed all those
from Adam who have sinned both
before the Law and in the Law, 0
Jesus, and after the Law and Grace, 0
my Jesus; but by Thy judgments save
me, 0 my Jesus. 
-232-
0 sweetestJesus, save us.
May I not be parted from Thine
ineffable glory, my Jesus, nor may the
portion on the left fall to me, 0 sweetest Jesus; but set me on the right hand
with Thy sheep and give me rest, 0
Christ my Jesus, since Thou art compassionate.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Theotokion: 0 Theotokos, who
didst carry Jesus, 0 only unwedded
Virgin Mary who knewest not wedlock,
0 pure one, invoke Him, thy Son and
Creator, to deliver them that hasten to
thee from temptation and perils, and
the fire that is to come.
Prayer to Our Lord Jesus Christ
0 Lord and Master,Jesus Christ my
God, Who, for the sake of Thine
ineffable love for mankind, at the end
of the ages wast wrapped in flesh from
the Ever-Virgin Mary, I glorify Thy 
-233-
saving providence and care for me,
Thy servant, 0 Master. I praise Thee,
for through Thee I have learned to
know the Father; I bless Thee through
Whom the Holy Spirit came into the
world; I bow to Thy most pure Mother
who served for the dread mystery of
Thine incarnation; I praise the angelic
choir as the servants and singers of Thy
majesty; I bless Saint John the
Forerunner who baptized Thee,
0 Lord; I honour also the prophets
who announced Thee, I glorify Thy
holy apostles; I celebrate the martyrs, I
glorify Thy priests; I venerate Thy
saints and praise all Thy righteous
ones. This such countless and unutterable divine choir I, Thy servant, in
prayer offer to Thee, 0 All-com passionate God, and therefore I ask the
forgiveness of my sins, which do Thou
grant me for the sake of all Thy saints, 
-234-
but especially for the sake of Thy holy
compassion, for blessed art Thou unto
the ages. Amen. 
-235-
SUPPLICATORY CANON
To the Most Holy Theotokos
Troparion, Fourth Tone: To the
Theotokos let us run now most earnestly, we sinners all and wretched ones,
and fall down, in repentance calling
from the depths of our souls: 0 Lady,
come unto our aid,. have compassion
upon us; hasten thou, for we are lost in
a throng of transgressions. Turn not
thy servants away with empty hands, for
thee alone do we have as our only
hope. Twice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to 
-236-
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
Never, 0 Theotokos, will we cease to
speak of thy powers, unworthy as we
are. For if thou didst not intercede in
prayer, who would have delivered us
from so many dangers? Who would
have kept us free until now? Let us
never forsake thee, 0 Lady, for thou
dost ever save thy servants from all
perils.
Canon, Eighth Tone:
ODE I
Eirmos: Having passed through the water
as on dry land, and having escaped the malice
of the Egyptians, the Israelites cried aloud:
Unto our God and Redeemer let us now sing.
Refrain: 0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Distressed by many temptations, I
flee to thee, seeking salvation. 0
Mother of the Word, and Virgin, from
ordeals and afflictions deliver me.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us. 
-237-
Outbursts of passions trouble me
and fill my soul with great despondency. Calm it, 0 Maiden, by the peace of
thy Son and God, 0 all-blameless one.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
I implore thee who gavest birth to
the Saviour and God, 0 Virgin to deliver me from perils. For, fleeing now
unto thee for refuge, I lift up both my
soul and my reasoning.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Ailing am I in body and soul, do
thou vouchsafe me the divine visitation, and thy care, 0 thou who alone
art the Mother of God, for thou art
good and the Mother of the Good.
ODE III
Eirmos: Of the vault of the heavens art
Thou, 0 Lord, the Maker, and Builder of the
Church; do Thou establish in me love of Thee,
0 Summit of desire, 0 Support of the faithful,
0 only Lover of mankind. 
-238-
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
I have chosen thee to be the protection and intercession of my life, 0
Virgin, Mother of God. Pilot me to thy
haven, 0 author of blessings, 0 support of the faithful, 0 thou only alllauded one.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
I pray thee, 0 Virgin, to dispel the
tumult of my soul and the storm of my
grief; for thou, 0 Bride of God, hast
given birth to Christ, the Prince of
Peace, 0 only immaculate one.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Since thou broughtest forth Him
Who is the Benefactor and Cause of
good, from the wealth of thy lovingkindness do thou pour forth on all; for
thou canst do all things, since thou
didst bear Christ, the One Who is
mighty in power; for blessed of God art
thou. 
-239-
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
I am tortured by grievous sicknesses
and morbid passions: 0 Virgin, do
thou help me; for I know thee to be an
inexhaustible treasury of unfailing
healing, 0 all-blameless one.
Lord have mercy. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
Sessional Hymn, Second Tone:
0 fervent advocate, invincible battlement, fountain of mercy, and sheltering retreat for the world, earnestly we
cry to thee: 0 Lady Theotokos,
hasten thou, and save us from all
imperilment; for thou alone art our
speedy protectress.
ODE IV
Eirmos: I have heard, 0 Lord, of the mystery of Thy dispensation, and I came to knowledge of Thy works, and glorify Thy Divinity.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us. 
-240-
The turmoil of my passions, and the
storm of my sins do thou bestill, thou
who gavest birth to the Lord and Pilot,
0 thou Bride of God.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
0 bestow, out of the abyss of thy
compassion, on me thy supplicant; for
thou didst give birth to the Kindhearted One and Saviour of all that
hymn thee.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
While delighting in thy gifts, 0 spotless one, we sing a song of thanksgiving
to thee, knowing thee to be the
Mother of God.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
As I lie on the bed of my pain and
infirmity, do thou help me, as thou art
a lover of goodness, 0 Theotokos, who
alone art Ever-Virgin.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen. 
-241-
Having thee as our staff and hope,
and as our salvation's unshaken battlement, from all manner of adversity are
we then redeemed, 0 thou all-lauded
one.
ODE V
Eirmos: Enlighten us by Thy commands, 0
Lord, and by Thy lofty arm bestow Thy peace
upon us, 0 Lover of mankind.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Fill my heart with gladness, 0 pure
one, by giving me thine incorruptible
joy, 0 thou who didst bear the Cause of
gladness.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Deliver us from dangers, 0 pure
Theotokos, who didst give birth to
Eternal Redemption, and the Peace
that doth pass all understanding.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Dispel the darkness of my sins, 0
Bride of God, by the radiance of thy 
-242-
splendour, for thou didst bear the
Light Divine and Pre-eternal.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Heal, 0 pure one, the infirmity of
my soul, when thou hast deemed me
worthy of thy visitation, and grant me
health by thine intercessions.
ODE VI
Eirmos: I will pour out my prayer unto the
Lord, and to Him will I proclaim my grief; for
with evils my soul is filled, and my life unto
hades hath drawn nigh, and like Jonah I will
pray: From corruption raise me up, 0 God.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
My nature, held by corruption and
death, hath He saved from out of
death and corruption; for unto death
He Himself hath submitted. Wherefore, 0 Virgin, do thou intercede with
Him Who is thy Lord and Son, to deliver me from enemies' wickedness.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
I know thee as the protection of my 
-243-
life, and most safe fortification, 0
Virgin; disperse the horde of temptations, and drive away demonic vexation; unceasingly I pray to thee: From
corruption of passions deliver me.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
We have acquired thee as a wall of
refuge, and the perfect salvation of our
souls, and a relief in afflictions, 0
Maiden, and we ever rejoice in thy
light. 0 Sovereign Lady, do thou also
now save us from passions and dangers.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Bedridden, I lie supine with sickness
now, and there is no ·healing for my
flesh; but to thee, 0 good one who
gavest birth to God and the Saviour of
the world and the Healer of infirmities, I pray: From corruption of illness
raise me up. 
-244-
Kontakion, Sixth Tone:
0 protection of Christians that cannot be put to shame, 0 mediation unto the Creator unfailing:
Disdain not the suppliant voices of sinners; but be thou quick, 0 good one,
to help us who in faith cry unto thee:
hasten to intercession, and speed thou
to make supplication, thou who dost
ever protect, 0 Theotokos, them that
honour thee.
Sticheron, same tone:
Entrust me not to human protection, 0 most holy Lady, but receive the
supplication of thy servant; for sorrow
hath fettered me, I cannot endure the
demon's darts; a shelter have I not,
neither place to run, I the wretched
one; always I am fleeing and no
consolation have I but thee, 0
Sovereign Lady of creation, hope and 
-245-
protection of the faithful; turn not away
from my supplication, do that which
will profit me.
ODE VII
Eirmos: Having gone down to Babylon
from Judea, the Children of old by their faith
in the Trinity trod down the flame of the furnace while chanting: 0 God of the fathers,
blessed art Thou.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Having willed to accomplish our
salvation, 0 Saviour, Thou didst dwell
in the womb of the Virgin, and didst
show her to the world as the mediatress; 0 God of our fathers, blessed art
Thou.
0 most holy Theotokos,. save us.
The Dispenser of mercy, Whom
thou didst bear, 0 pure Mother, do
thou implore to deliver from transgressions and defilements of the soul,
those who with faith cry out: 0 God of
our fathers, blessed art Thou. 
-246-
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
A treasury of salvation, and a fountain of incorruption is she who gave
Thee birth; a tower of safety, and a
door of repentance hast Thou proved
her to them that shout: 0 God of our
fathers, blessed art Thou.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
For weakness of body and sickness of
soul, 0 Theotokos, do thou vouchsafe
healing to those who with love draw
near to thy protection, 0 Virgin, who
for us gavest birth to Christ the
Saviour.
ODE VIII
Eirmos: The King of Heaven, Whom hosts
of angels hymn, praise ye and supremely exalt
unto all ages.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Disdain not those who need thy
help, 0 Virgin, and who hymn and
supremely exalt thee unto the ages. 
-247-
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Thou healest the infirmity of my
soul and the pains of my body, 0
Virgin, that I may glorify thee, 0 pure
one, unto the ages.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Thou pourest forth a wealth of healing, on those who with faith hymn
thee, 0 Virgin, and who supremely
exalt thine ineffable Offspring.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages.Amen.
Thou drivest away the assaults of
temptations, and the attacks of the passions, 0 Virgin; wherefore do we hymn
thee unto all ages.
ODE IX
Eirmos: Truly we confess thee to be the
Theotokos, we who through thee have been
saved, 0 pure Virgin; with the bodiless choirs,
thee do we magnify.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us. 
-248-
Turn not away from the torrent of
my tears, 0 Virgin, thou who didst give
birth to Christ, Who doth wipe away all
tears from every face.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Fill my heart with joy, 0 Virgin, thou
who didst receive the fullness of joy,
and didst banish the grief of sin.
0 most holy Theotokos, save us.
Be the haven and protection, and a
wall unshaken, a refuge and shelter,
and the gladness, 0 Virgin, of those
who flee unto thee.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Illumine with the rays of thy light, 0
Virgin, those who piously confess thee
to be the Theotokos, and do thou banish away all darkness of ignorance.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Theotokion: In a place of affliction
and infirmity am I brought low; 0 
-249-
Virgin, do thou heal me, transforming
mine illness into healthfulness.
Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos:
0 my most blessed Queen, 0
Theotokos my hope, guardian of
orphans, intercessor for strangers, joy
of the sorrowful, protectress of the
wronged: thou seest my misfortune,
thou seest mine affliction; help me, for
I am weak; feed me, for I am a stranger.
Thou knowest mine offence: absolve it
as thou wilt, for I have no other help
beside thee, no other intercessor, nor
good consoler, except thee, 0 Mother
of God. Do thou preserve and protect
me unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
-250-
CANON
to the Guardian Angel
Troparion, Sixth Tone: 0 Angel of
God, my holy guardian, keep my life in
the fear of Christ God; strengthen my
mind in the true way, and wound my
soul with heavenly love, so that, guarded by thee, I may obtain of Christ God
great mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
Theotokion: 0 holy Lady, Mother of
Christ our God, thou didst inexplicably bear the Creator of all; with my
guardian angel entreat always His
goodness to save my soul, possessed by
passions, and to grant me remission of
sins. 
-251-
Canon, Eighth Tone:
Eirmos: Let us sing to the Lord, Who led
His people through the Red Sea, for He alone
is gloriously glorified.
Refrain: 0 Lord Jesus Christ my God, have
mercy on me.
To Jesus: Vouchsafe me, Thy servant, 0 Saviour, worthily to sing a song
and to praise the fleshless angel, my
guide and guardian.
Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray
to God for me.
Alone I lie in folly and idleness, 0
my guide and guardian, forsake not
me who am perishing.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Direct my mind by thy prayer to
. fulfill the commands of God, that I
may obtain of God forgiveness of sins,
and teach me to hate all wickedness, I
pray thee.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen. 
-252-
With my guardian angel, 0 Virgin,
pray for me, thy servant, to the Gracious One, and teach me to fulfill the
commandments of thy Son and my
Creator.
ODE III
Eirmos: Thou art the support of those who
flee unto Thee, 0 Lord, Thou art the light of
those in darkness, and my spirit doth hymn
Thee.
Refrain: Holy Angel of the Lord, my
guardian, pray to God for me.
All my thoughts and my soul I have
committed unto thee, 0 my guardian;
do thou deliver me from all attacks of
the enemy.
Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray
to God for me.
The enemy troubleth and trampleth on me, and teacheth me always
to do his will, but do thou, 0 my guide.
forsake not me who am perishing.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit. 
-253-
Grant me to sing a song with thanksgiving and fervour unto my Creator
and God, and to thee, my good Angel
Guardian; 0 my deliverer, rescue me
from foes that do me evil.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Heal, 0 immaculate one, the most
painful wounds of my soul, and drive
away the enemies that ever fight
against me.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Sessional Hymn, Second Tone:
Out of the love of my soul I cry to
thee, 0 guardian of my soul, mine allholy Angel! Protect and guard me
always from the hunting of the evil
one, and guide me to the heavenly life,
teaching and enlightening and
strengthening me.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen. 
-254-
Theotokion: 0 Theotokos Unwedded, 0 most pure one who gavest birth
without seed to the Master of all,
together with my guardian angel
entreat Him to deliver me from all perplexity, and to grant my soul compunction and light, and cleansing of sins,
for thou alone art quick to help.
ODE IV
Eirmos: I have heard, 0 Lord, of the mystery of Thy dispensation, and I came to knowledge of Thy works, and I glorify Thy Divinity.
Refrain: Holy Angel of the Lord, my
guardian, pray to God for me.
Pray thou to God, the Lover of mankind, and forsake me not, 0 my guardian, but ever keep my life in peace, and
grant me the invincible salvation.
Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray
to God for me.
As the defender and guardian of my
life I received thee from God, 0 Angel.
I pray thee, 0 holy one, free me from 
-255-
all danger.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Cleanse my defilement by thy holiness, 0 my guardian, and may I be
drawn from the left side by thy prayers,
and become a partaker of glory.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages.
Perplexity confronteth me from the
evil surrounding me, 0 most pure one,
but deliver me from it speedily, for I
flee only to thee.
ODE V
Eirmos: Awaking at dawn, we cry to Thee:
0 Lord, save us; for Thou art our God, beside
Thee we know none other.
Refrain: Holy Angel of the Lord, my
guardian, pray to God for rrie.
As one having boldness toward God,
0 my holy guardian, do thou entreat
Him to deliver me from the evils that
. afflict me.
I
Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray 
-256-
to God for me.
0 radiant light, illumine my soul
with radiance, 0 my guide and
guardian, given me by God, 0 Angel.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Keep me vigilant who sleep from
the evil burden of sin, 0 Angel of God,
and raise me up to glorify Him,
through thy supplication.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
0 Mary, Lady Theotokos unwedded, 0 hope of the faithful, subdue
the uprisings of the enemy, and gladden them that hymn thee.
ODE VI
Eirmos: Grant me a garment of light, 0
Thou Who coverest Thyself with light as with a
garment, 0 plenteously-merciful Christ our
God.
Refrain: Holy Angel of the Lord,
guardian, pray to God for me.
Free me from every temptation, and 
-257-
save me from sorrow, I pray thee, 0
!
1
' holy Angel, given to me as my good
, guardian by God.
Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray
to God for me.
Enlighten my mind, 0 good one,
and illumine me, I pray thee, 0 holy
Angel, and teach me to think always
profitably.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Abolish present disturbance from
my heart, and strengthen me to be vigilant in good, 0 my guardian, and guide
me miraculously to quietness of life.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
The Word of God dwelt in thee, 0
Theotokos, and showed thee to men as
the heavenly ladder; for by thee the
Most High descended to us.
Kontakion, Fourth Tone:
Show compassion to me, 0 holy 
-258-
angel of the Lord, my guardian, and
leave not me, a defiled one, but illumine me with the light unapproachable, and make me worthy of the heavenly kingdom.
Ekos: Vouchsafe my soul, humiliated by many temptations, the ineffable
glory, 0 holy intercessor and singer
with the choirs of the fleshless hosts of
God. Have mercy and guard me, and
illumine my soul with good thoughts,
that I may be enriched by thy glory, 0
my angel; and subdue the enemies that
wish me evil, and make me worthy of
the heavenly kingdom.
ODE VII
Eirmos: Having gone down to Babylon
from Judea, the Children of old by their faith
in the Trinity trod down the flame of the furnace while chanting: 0 God of the fathers,
blessed art Thou.
Refrain: Holy Angel of the Lord, my
guardian, pray to God for me.
Be merciful to me and entreat God, 
-259-
0 Angel of the Lord; for I have thee as
a defender for the whole of my life, a
guide and guardian given me by God
for ever.
Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray
to God for me.
Leave not my wretched soul, which
was given thee blameless by God, to be
slain by robbers along the way, 0 holy
Angel, but guide it to the way of repentance.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
My whole soul is disgraced by the
evil thoughts and deeds I have brought
upon me, but make haste, Omy guide,
and grant me healing with good
thoughts, that I may be-inclined always
to the right way.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
0 Wisdom of the Most High Personified, for the sake of the Theo-
- 260-
tokos, fill with wisdom and divine
strength all that faithfully cry: 0 God
of our fathers, blessed art Thou.
ODE VIII
Eirmos: The King of heaven, Whom hosts
of angels hymn, praise ye and supremely exalt
unto all ages.
Refrain: Holy Angel of the Lord, my
guardian, pray to God for me.
0 good Angel, sent by God, support
me, thy servant, in my life and forsake
me not unto the ages.
Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray
to God for me.
0 most-blessed one, I hymn thee, 0
good Angel, guide and guardian of my
soul unto the ages.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Be unto me a protection and fortification in the judgment day of all men,
in which all deeds, both good and evil,
shall be tried by fire.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of 
-261-
ages. Amen.
Be unto me, thy servant, a helper
and a calmness, 0 Ever-Virgin Theotokos, and leave me not bereft of thy
protection.
ODE IX
Eirmos: Truly we confess thee to be the
Theotokos, we who through thee have been
saved, 0 pure Virgin; with the bodiless choirs,
thee do we magnify.
Refrain: 0 Lord Jesus Christ my God, have
mercy on me.
Have mercy on me, 0 my only Saviour, for Thou art merciful and kindhearted, and make me a member of
the choirs of the righteous.
Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray
to God for me.
Grant me ever to think and do
what is useful, 0 Angel of the Lord, that
I may be blameless and strong in infirmity.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit. 
-262-
As one having boldness toward the
Heavenly King, do thou, with the rest
of the bodiless ones, entreat Him to
have mercy on me the wretched one.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Having great boldness toward Him
Who took flesh of thee, 0 Virgin, deliver me from fetters and grant me absolution and salvation through thine
intercessions.
Prayer to the Guardian Angel
0 holy Angel, my good guardian
and protector! With broken
heart and ailing soul I stand before
thee, entreating: Hearken unto me, thy
sinful servant (Name); with loud wailing and bitter weeping I cry: Remember not mine iniquity and unrighteousness, through which I a wretched
one, have angered thee every day and
hour, and have made myself loathsome
before our Lord the Creator; show me 
-263-
loving-kindness and leave not me, the
defiled, even until mine end. Awaken
me from the sleep of sin, and enable
me, through thine intercessions, to
pass the remaining time of my life
without stain, and bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance; and above all
preserve me from deadly falls into sin,
lest I perish in despair, and mine
' enemy rejoice in my ruin. I know truly
and confess with my mouth that there is
no other friend and intercessor, protector and champion, such as thou, 0
holy Angel; for, standing before the
throne of the Lord, thou intercedest
for me the useless and most sinful of
all, lest the Most Good One take my
soul in the day of my despair and in a
day of evil doing. Cease not, therefore,
to entreat mercy of my most kindhearted Lord and God, that He forgive
mine offences, which I have committed 
-264-
throughout all my life, in deed, word,
and all my senses, and by judgments
which He knoweth, that He save me;
that He may chasten me here according to His ineffable mercy, but that He
may not expose and put me to trial
there in accordance with His simple
justice; that He may deem me worthy
to bring repentance, and with penitence to worthily receive Divine
Communion; for this above all I make
entreaty, and I desire such a gift with
all my heart. And in the terrible hour
of death, be not far from me, my good
guardian, driving away the demons of
darkness, who have the power to terrify my trembling soul; defend me from
their net, when I shall pass through the
aerial tollhouses, in order that, being
guarded by thee, I may attain the
desired paradise, where the choirs of
the saints and the celestial hosts un-
-265-
ceasingly praise the all-honourable
and majestic name in Trinity of God
glorified: the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, to Whom is due honour
and worship, unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
• •••••• 
-266-
AKATHIST
to our
Sweetest Lord Jesus Christ
Kontakion 1
0 Champion Leader and Lord,
Vanquisher of hades, I, Thy creature and servant, offer Thee songs of
praise, for Thou hast delivered me
from eternal death; but as Thou hast
unutterable loving-kindness, free me
from every danger, as I cry:
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me! 
-267-
Ekos I
C
reator of angels and Lord of hosts,
as of old Thou didst open ear
and tongue to the deaf and dumb, likewise open now my perplexed mind
and tongue to the praise of Thy most
holy name, that I may cry to Thee:
Jesus, Most-wonderful, Angels' Astonishment!
Jesus, Most-powerful, Forefathers'
Deliverance!
Jesus, Most-sweet, Patriarchs' Exaltation!
Jesus, Most-glorious, Kings' Stronghold!
Jesus, Most-beloved, Prophets' Fulfillment!
Jesus, Most-marvelous, Martyrs'
Strength!
Jesus, Most-peaceful, Monks' Joy!
Jesus, Most-gracious, Presbyters'
Sweetness! 
-268-
Jesus, Most-merciful, Fasters' Abstinence!
Jesus, Most-tender, Saints' Rejoicing!
Jesus, Most-honourable, Virgins'
Chastity!
Jesus, Everlasting, Sinners' Salvation!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 2
A s when seeing the widow weeping
J-\.. bitterly, 0 Lord, Thou wast
moved with pity, and didst raise her
son from the dead as he was being carried to burial, likewise have pity on me,
0 Lover of mankind, and raise my
soul, deadened by sins, as I cry: Alleluia!
Ekos 2
S
eeking to understand the incomprehensible, Philip asked: Lord,
show us the Father, and Thou didst
answer him: Have I been so long with
you and yet hast thou not known that I 
-269-
am in the Father and the Father in Me?
Likewise, 0 Incomprehensible One,
with fear I cry to Thee:
Jesus, Eternal God!
Jesus, All-powerful King!
Jesus, Long-suffering Master!
Jesus, All-merciful Saviour!
Jesus, my Gracious Guardian!
Jesus, cleanse my sins!
Jesus, take away mine iniquities!
Jesus, pardon mine unrighteousness!
Jesus, my Hope, forsake me not!
Jesus, my Helper, reject me not!
Jesus, my Creator, forget me not!
Jesus, my Shepherd, destroy me not!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 3
T
hou Who didst clothe with power
from on high Thine apostles who
tarried in Jerusalem, 0 Jesus, clothe
also me, stripped bare of all good
works, with the warmth of Thy Holy 
-270-
Spirit, and grant that with love I may
sing to Thee: Alleluia!
Ekos 3
I
n the abundance of Thy mercy, 0
Jesus, Thou hast called publicans
and sinners and infidels. Now disdain
me not who am like them, but as precious myrrh accept this song:
Jesus, Invincible Power!
Jesus, Infinite Mercy!
Jesus, Radiant Beauty!
Jesus, Unspeakable Love!
Jesus, Son of the Living God!
Jesus, have mercy on me a sinner!
Jesus, hear me who was conceived
in sins!
Jesus, cleanse me who was born in
sins!
Jesus, teach me who am worthless!
Jesus, enlighten my darkness!
Jesus, purify me who am unclean!
Jesus, restore me, a prodigal! 
-271-
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 4
H
aving an interior storm of doubting thoughts, Peter was sinking.
But beholding Thee in the flesh walking on the waters, 0 Jesus, he confessed Thee to be the true God; and
receiving the hand of salvation, he
cried: Alleluia!
Ekos 4
W
en the blind man heard Thee,
0 Lord, passing by on the way,
he cried: Jesus, Son of David, have
mercy on me! And Thou didst call
him and open his eyes. Likewise enlighten the spiritual eyes of my heart
with Thy love as I cry to Thee and say:
Jesus, Creator of those on high!
Jesus, Redeemer of those below!
Jesus, Vanquisher of the power of
hades!
Jesus, Adorner of every creature! 
-272-
Jesus, Comforter of my soul!
Jesus, Enlightener of my mind!
Jesus, Gladness of my heart!
Jesus, Health of my body!
Jesus, my Saviour, save me!
Jesus, my Light, enlighten me!
Jesus, deliver me from all torments!
Jesus, save me despite mine unworthiness!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 5
J\ s of old Thou didst redeem us from
1"1 the curse of the law by Thy Divineflowing Blood, 0 Jesus, likewise rescue
us from the snares in which the serpent hath entangled us through the
passions of the flesh, through lustful
suggestions, and evil despondency, as
we cry unto Thee: Alleluia!
Ekos 5
H
aving beheld the Creator in
human form and knowing Him 
-273-
to be the Master, the Hebrew children
hastened to please Him with branches,
crying: Hosanna! But we offer Thee a
song, saying:
Jesus, True God!
Jesus, Son of David!
Jesus, Most-glorious King!
Jesus, Blameless Lamb!
Jesus, Most-wonderful Shepherd!
Jesus, Guardian of mine infancy!
Jesus, Nourisher of my youth!
Jesus, Praise of mine old age!
Jesus, my Hope at death!
Jesus, my Life after death!
Jesus, my Comfort at Thy judgment!
Jesus, my Desire, put me not then to
shame!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me I
Kontakion 6
I
n fulfillment of the words and message of the God-bearing prophets,
0 Jesus, Thou didst appear on earth, 
-274-
and Thou Who art uncontainable
didst dwell with men, and didst take on
our infirmities; being healed through
Thy wounds, we have learned to sing:
Alleluia!
Ekos 6
T
he light of Thy truth shone upon
the world, and demonic delusion
was driven away; for the idols have fallen, 0 our Saviour, unable to endure
Thy strength. But we, having received i salvation, cry to Thee:
Jesus, the Truth, dispelling falsehood!
Jesus, the Light, above all radiance!
Jesus, the King, surpassing all m
strength!
Jesus, God, constant in mercy!
Jesus, Bread of Life, fill me who am
hungry!
Jesus, Source of Knowledge, give
me to drink who am thirsty! 
'
'
-275-
Jesus, Garment of Gladness, cloth
me, the corruptible!
Jesus, Shelter of Joy, cover me, the
unworthy!
Jesus, Giver to those that ask, give
me sorrow for my sins!
Jesus, Finder of those that seek, find
my soul!
Jesus, Opener to those that knock,
open my wretched heart!
Jesus, Redeemer of sinners, blot out
my transgressions!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me I
Kontakion 7
D
esiring to reveal the mystery hidden from the ages, Thou wast led
as a sheep to the slaughter, 0 Jesus,
and as a lamb before its shearer. But as
God Thou didst rise from the dead
and didst ascend with glory to heaven,
and along with Thyself Thou didst
raise us who cry: Alleluia! 
-276-
Ekos 7
T
he Creator hath shown us a marvelous Creature, Who was incarnate of a Virgin without seed, rose
from the tomb without breaking the
seal, and entered bodily the apostles'
room when the doors were shut.
Wherefore, marvelling at this, we sing:
Jesus, Infinite Word!
Jesus, Inscrutable Word!
Jesus, Incomprehensible Power!
Jesus, Inconceivable Wisdom!
Jesus, Inexpressible Divinity!
Jesus, Boundless Dominion I
Jesus, Invincible Kingdom!
Jesus, Endless Sovereignty!
Jesus, Supreme Strength!
Jesus, Power Eternal!
Jesus, my Creator, have compassion
on met
Jesus, my Saviour, save me!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me! 
-277-
Kontakion 8
S
eeing God wondrously incarnate,
let us shun the vain world and set
our mind on things divine; for God
came down to earth that He might
raise to heaven us who cry to Him:
Alleluia!
Ekos 8
T
he Immeasurable One was below
all things, yet in no way separated
from things above, when He willingly
suffered for our sake, and by His death
our death didst put to death, and by
His Resurrection didst grant life to
those that sing:
Jesus, Sweetness of the heart!
Jesus, Strength of the body!
Jesus, Radiance of the soul!
Jesus, Swiftness of the mind!
Jesus, Joy of the conscience!
Jesus, Well-known Hope!
Jesus, Memory before the ages! 
-278-
Jesus, High Praise!
Jesus, my Supremely-exalted Glory!
Jesus, my Desire, reject me not!
Jesus, my Shepherd, seek me!
Jesus, my Saviour, save me!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 9
A 11 the angelic nature of heaven
doth glorify unceasingly Thy
most holy name, 0 Jesus, crying: Holy,
Holy, Holy! But we sinners on earth
with lips of dust cry: Alleluia!
Ekos 9
We see most eloquent orators
voiceless as fish concerning
Thee, 0 Jesus our Saviour; for they are
at a loss to say how Thou art perfect
man, yet remainest God immutable;
but we, marvelling at this mystery, cry
faithfully:
Jesus, God before the ages!
Jesus, King of kings! 
-279-
Jesus, Master of rulers!
Jesus,Judge of the living and the
dead!
Jesus, Hope of the hopeless!
Jesus, Comfort of them that mourn!
Jesus, Glory of the poor!
Jesus, condemn me not according
to my deeds!
Jesus, cleanse me according to Thy
mercy!
Jesus, drive from me despondency!
Jesus, enlighten the thoughts of my
heart!
Jesus, ·grant me remembrance of
death!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 10
D
esiring to save the world, 0 Sunrise of the East, Thou didst come
to the dark Occident of our nature,
and didst humble Thyself even unto
death; wherefore, Thy name is 
-280-
supremely exalted above every name,
and from all the tribes of heaven and
earth Thou dost hear: Alleluia!
Ekos 10
TTing Eternal, Comforter, true
.ft Christ! Cleanse us of every stain,
as Thou didst cleanse the Ten Lepers;
and heal us, as Thou didst heal the
greedy soul of Zacchaeus the Pul:r
lican, that we may shout to Thee in
compunction, crying aloud:
Jesus, Treasury Incorruptible!
Jesus, Wealth Unfailing!
Jesus, Strong Food!
Jesus, Drink Inexhaustible!
Jesus, Garment of the poor!
Jesus, Protection of widows!
Jesus, Defender of orphans!
Jesus, Help of toilers!
Jesus, Guide of pilgrims!
Jesus, Pilot of voyagers!
Jesus, Calmer of tempests! 
-281-
Jesus, God, raise me who am fallen!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 11
T
enderest songs I, though unworthy, offer to Thee, and like the
woman of Canaan, I cry unto Thee: 0
Jesus, have mercy on me! For it is not
a daughter, but my flesh cruelly possessed with passions and burning with
fury. So grant healing to me who cry
unto Thee: Alleluia.
Ekos 11
H
aving previously persecuted
Thee, the Light-bestowing Lamp
of those in the darkness of ignorance,
Paul heeded the power of the voice of
Divine enlightenment, and under-
. stood the swiftness of the soul's conversion; thus also do Thou enlighten
the dark eye of my soul, as I cry:
Jesus, my Most-mighty King! 
-282-
Jesus, my Most-powerful God!
Jesus, mine Immortal Lord!
Jesus, my Most-glorious Creator!
Jesus, my Most-good Guide!
Jesus, my Most-compassionate Shepherd!
Jesus, my Most-merciful Master!
Jesus, my Most-gracious Saviour!
Jesus, enlighten my senses darkened by passions!
Jesus, heal my body scabbed with
sins!
Jesus, cleanse my mind of vain
thoughts!
Jesus, keep my heart from evil
desires!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 12
G
rant me Thy grace, 0 Jesus, Al>-
solver of all debts, and receive
me who am repenting, as Thou didst
receive Peter who denied Thee, and 
-283-
call me who am downcast, as of old
Thou didst call Paul who persecuted
Thee, and hear me crying to Thee:
Alleluia!
Ekos 12
P
raising Thine incarnation, we all
extol Thee, and we believe with
Thomas that Thou art Lord and God,
sitting with the Father and coming to
judge the living and the dead. Vouchsafe me then to stand on Thy right
hand, who now cry:
Jesus,King before the ages, have
mercy on me.
Jesus, Sweet-scented Flower, make
me fragrant!
Jesus, Beloved Warmth, make me
fervent!
Jesus, Eternal Temple, shelter me!
Jesus, Garment of Light, adorn me!
Jesus, Pearl of Great Price, irradiate
me! 
- 284-
Jesus, Precious Stone, illumine me!
Jesus, Sun of Righteousness, shine
onme!
Jesus, Holy Light, make me radiant!
Jesus, from sickness of soul and
body deliver me I
Jesus, from the hands of the adversary rescue me!
Jesus, from the unquenchable fire
and other eternal torments
save me!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 13
0 most-sweet and all-compassionate Jesus! Receive now this our
small supplication, as Thou didst
receive the widow's two mites, and
keep Thine inheritance from all enemies, visible and invisible, from foreign invasion, from disease and famine,
from all tribulations and mortal
wounds, and rescue from the torment 
-285-
to come all that cry to Thee: Alleluia!
This is said thrice. Then:
Ekos 1
C
reator of angels and Lord of hosts,
as of old Thou didst open ear
and tongue to the deaf and dumb,
likewise open now my perplexed mind
and tongue to the praise of Thy most
holy name, that I may cry to Thee:
Jesus, Most-wonderful, Angels' Astonishment!
Jesus, Most-powerful, Forefathers'
Deliverance I
Jesus, Most-sweet, Patriarchs' Exaltation!
Jesus, Most-glorious, Kings' Stronghold!
Jesus, Most-beloved, Prophets' Fulfillment!
Jesus, Most-marvelous, Martyrs'
Strength!
Jesus, Most-peaceful, Monks' Joy! 
-286-
Jesus, Most-gracious, Presbyters'
Sweetness!
Jesus, Most-merciful, Fasters' Abstinence!
Jesus, Most-tender, Saints' Rejoicing!
Jesus, Most-honourable, Virgins'
Chastity!
Jesus, Everlasting, Sinners' Salvation!
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me!
Kontakion 1
0 Champion Leader and Lord,
Vanquisher of hades, I, Thy creature and servant, offer Thee songs of
praise, for Thou hast delivered me
from eternal death; but as Thou hast
unutterable loving-kindness, free me
from every danger, as I cry:
Jesus, Son of God, have mercy on me! 
-287-
Prayer to Our Lord Jesus Christ
T
o Thee, 0 Lord, the only Good
One, Who rememberest not evils,
I confess my sins, I fall down before
Thee, unworthy that I am, crying out: I
have sinned, 0 Lord, I have sinned,
and I am not worthy to look upon the
height of heaven for the multitude of
mine iniquities. But, my Lord, 0 Lord,
grant me tears of compunction, Thou
Who alone art good and merciful, so
that with them I may entreat Thee to
cleanse me of all sin before the end;
for frightful and terrible is the place
that I must pass through when I have
separated from this body, and a multitude of dark and inhuman demons
awaiteth me, and there is no one to
come to my help or to deliver me;
wherefore, I fall down before Thy
goodness: deliver me not up to them
that wrong me, nor let mine enemies 
-288-
triumph over me, 0 Good Lord, nor
let them say: thou hast come into our
hands, and thou hast been delivered
unto us. Neither, 0 Lord, forget Thy compassions, and render not unto me
according to mine iniquities, and turn
not Thy countenance away from me;
but do Thou, 0 Lord, chasten me, but
with mercy and compassion, and let
not mine enemy rejoice over me, but
quench his threatening against me,
and bring to nought all his deeds. And
grant me an unsullied way to Thee, 0
Good Lord, because, having sinned, I
have not had recourse to any other
physician, and have not stretched out
my hands to a strange god. Therefore,
reject not my supplication, but hearken unto me in Thy goodness, and
strengthen my heart in Thy fear; and
let Thy grace be upon me, 0 Lord, like
a fire consuming the impure thoughts 
-289-
within me. For Thou, 0 Lord, art the
Light above all lights, the Joy above all
joys, the Repose above all repose, the
True Life, and the Salvation that
abideth unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
-290-
AKATHIST
to Our Most Holy Lady
the Theotokos
Kontakion 1
T
o Thee, the Champion Leader, we
thy servants dedicate a feast of victory and of thanksgiving as ones rescued out of sufferings, 0 Theotokos;
but as thou art one with might which is
invincible, from all dangers that can be
do thou deliver us, that we may cry to
thee:
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded! 
-291-
Ekos 1
An archangel was sent from heaven fl. to say to the Theotokos: Rejoice!
And beholding Thee, 0 Lord, taking
bodily form, he was amazed and with
his bodiless voice he stood crying to
her such things as these:
Rejoice, thou through whom joy
will shine forth!
Rejoice, thou through whom the
curse will cease I
Rejoice, recall of fallen Adami
Rejoice, redemption of the tears of
Eve!
Rejoice, height inaccessible to
human thought!
Rejoice, depth indiscernible even
for the eyes of angels!
Rejoice, for thou art the King's
throne!
Rejoice, for thou hearest Him Who
beareth alll 
-292-
Rejoice, star that causest the Sun to
appear!
Rejoice, womb of the Divine Incarnation!
Rejoice, thou through whom creation is renewed!
Rejoice, thou · through whom we
worship the Creator!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 2
S
eeing herself to be chaste, the holy
one said boldly to Gabriel: The
marvel of thy speech is difficult for my
soul to accept. How canst thou speak
of a birth from a seedless conception?
And she cried: Alleluia.
Ekos 2
S
eeking to know knowledge that
cannot be known, the Virgin cried
to the ministering one: Tell me, how
can a son be born from a chaste womb?
Then he spake to her in fear, only cry-
-293-
ing aloud thus:
Rejoice, initiate of God's ineffable
will!
Rejoice, assurance of those who
pray in silence!
Rejoice, beginning of Christ's miracles!
Rejoice, crown of His dogmas!
Rejoice, heavenly ladder by which
God came down!
Rejoice, bridge that conveyest us
from earth to heaven I
Rejoice, wonder of angels sounded
abroad!
Rejoice, wound of demons bewailed
afar!
Rejoice, thou who ineffably gavest
birth to the Light!
Rejoice, thou who didst reveal thy
secret to none!
Rejoice, thou who surpassest the
knowledge of the wise I 
-294-
Rejoice, thou who givest light to the
minds of the faithful!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 3
T
he power of the Most High then
overshadowed the Virgin for conception, and showed her fruitful womb
as a sweet meadow to all who wish to
reap salvation, as they sing: Alleluia!
Ekos 3
H
aving received God into her
womb, the Virgin hastened to
Elizabeth whose unborn babe at once
recognized her embrace, rejoiced, and
with leaps of joy as songs, cried to the
Theotokos:
Rejoice, branch of an Unfading
Sprout!
Rejoice, acquisition of Immortal
Fruit!
Rejoice, labourer that labourest for
the Lover of mankind! 
-295-
Rejoice, thou who gavest birth to
the Planter of our life!
Rejoice, cornland yielding a rich
crop of mercies!
Rejoice, table bearing a wealth of
forgiveness!
Rejoice, thou who makest to bloom
the garden of delight!
Rejoice, thou who preparest a
haven for souls!
Rejoice, acceptable incense of intercession!
Rejoice, propitiation of all the
world!
Rejoice, good will of God to mortals!
Rejoice, boldness of mortals before
God!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unweddedl
Kontakion 4
H
aving within a tempest of doubting thoughts, the chaste Joseph
was troubled. For knowing thee to 
-296-
have no husband, he suspected a secret
union, 0 blameless one. But having
learned that thy conception was of the
Holy Spirit, he said: Alleluia!
Ekos 4
"{ A Jhile the angels were chanting,
V V the shepherds heard of Christ's
coming in the flesh, and having run to
the Shepherd, they beheld Him as a
blameless Lamb that had been pastured in Mary's womb, and singing to
her they cried:
Rejoice, Mother of the Lamb and
the Shepherd!
Rejoice, fold of rational sheep!
Rejoice, torment of invisible enemies!
Rejoice, opening of the gates of paradise!
Rejoice, for the things of heaven
rejoice with the earth!
Rejoice, for the things of earth join 
-297-
chorus with the heavens!
Rejoice, never-silent mouth of the
apostles!
Rejoice, invincible courage of the
passion-bearers!
Rejoice, firm support of faith!
Rejoice, radiant token of grace!
Rejoice, thou through whom hades
was stripped bare!
Rejoice, thou through whom we are
clothed with glory!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unweddedl
Kontakion 5
H
aving sighted the divinely-moving
star, the Magi followed its radiance; and holding it as a lamp, by it
they sought a powerful King; and having reached the Unreachable One, they
rejoiced, shouting to Him: Alleluia!
Ekos 5
T
he sons of the Chaldees saw in the
hands of the Virgin Him Who with 
-298-
His hand made man. And knowing
Him to be the Master, even though He
had taken the form of a servant, they
hastened to serve Him with gifts, and
to cry to her who is blessed:
Rejoice, Mother of the Unsetting
Star!
Rejoice, dawn of the mystic day!
Rejoice, thou who didst extinguish
the furnace of error!
Rejoice, thou who didst enlighten
the initiates of the Trinity!
Rejoice, thou who didst banish
from power the inhuman
tyrant!
Rejoice, thou who didst show us
Christ the Lord, the Lover
of mankind!
Rejoice, thou who redeemest from
pagan worship!
Rejoice, thou who dost drag us from
the works of mire! 
-299-
Rejoice, thou who didst quench the
worship of fire!
Rejoice, thou who rescuest from the
flame of the passions!
Rejoice, guide of the faithful to
chastity!
Rejoice, gladness of all generations!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 6
H
aving become God-bearing heralds, the Magi returned to Babylon, having fulfilled Thy prophecy;
and having preached Thee to all as the
Christ, they left Herod as a babbler who
knew not how to sing: Alleluia!
Ekos 6
B
y shining in Egypt the light
of truth, Thou didst dispel the
darkness of falsehood; for its idols fell,
0 Saviour, unable to endure Thy
strength; and those who were delivered
from them cried to the Theotokos: 
-300-
Rejoice, uplifting of men!
Rejoice, downfall of demons!
Rejoice, thou who didst trample
down the dominion of
delusion!
Rejoice, thou who didst unmask the ' fraud of idols!
Rejoice, sea that didst drown the
Pharaoh of the mind!
Rejoice, rock that dost refresh those
thirsting for life!
Rejoice, pillar of fire that guidest
those in darkness!
Rejoice, shelter of the world broader than a cloud!
Rejoice, sustenance replacing manna!
Rejoice, minister of holy delight!
Rejoice, land of promise!
Rejoice, thou from whom floweth
milk and honey!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded! 
-301-
Kontakion 7
"'{ A Then Symeon was about to depart
V V this age of delusion, Thou wast
brought as a Babe to him, but Thou wast
recognized by him as perfect God also;
wherefore, marvelling at Thine ineffable wisdom, he cried: Alleluia!
Ekos 7
T
he Creator showed us a new creation when He appeared to us who
come from Him. For He sprang from
a seedless womb, and kept it incorrupt
as it was, that seeing the mir-acle we
might sing to her, crying out:
Rejoice, flower of incorruptibility!
Rejoice, crown of continence!
Rejoice, thou from whom shineth
the Archetype of the resurrection!
Rejoice, thou who revealest the life
of the angels!
Rejoice, tree of shining fruit where-
-302-
by the faithful are nourished!
Rejoice, tree of goodly shade by
which many are sheltered!
Rejoice, thou that hast carried in
thy womb the Redeemer of
captives!
Rejoice, thou that gavest birth to
the Guide of those astray!
Rejoice, supplication before the
Righteous Judge!
Rejoice, forgiveness of many sins!
Rejoice, robe of boldness for the
naked!
Rejoice, love that vanquishest all
desire!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 8
H
aving beheld a strange nativity,
let us estrange ourselves from
the world and transport our minds to
heaven; for the Most High God 
-303-
appeared on earth as a lowly man,
because He wished to draw to the
heights them that cry to Him: Alleluia!
Ekos 8
"'{ A ]holly present was the InexpresV V sible Word among those here
below, yet in no way absent from those
on high; for this was a divine condescension and not a change of place,
and His birth was from a God-receiving
Virgin who heard these things:
Rejoice, container of the Uncontainable God!
Rejoice, door of solemn mystery!
Rejoice, report doubtful to unbelievers!
Rejoice, undoubted boast of the
faithful!
Rejoice, all-holy chariot of Him Who
sitteth upon the Cherubim!
Rejoice, all-glorious temple of Him
Who is above the Seraphim! 
-304-
Rejoice, thou who hast united opposites!
Rejoice, thou who hast joined virginity and motherhood!
Rejoice, thou through whom transgression hath been absolved!
Rejoice, thou through whom paradise is opened!
Rejoice, key to the kingdom of
Christ!
Rejoice, hope of eternal good things!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 9
A 11 the angels were amazed at the
J-1 great act of Thine incarnation;
for they saw the Unapproachable God
as a man approachable to all, abiding
with us, and hearing from all: Alleluia!
Ekos 9
We see most eloquent orators
mute as fish before thee, 0
Theotokos, for they are at a loss to tell 
-305-
how thou remainest a Virgin and
couldst bear a child. But we, marvelling at this mystery, cry out faithfully:
Rejoice, receptacle of the Wisdom
of God!
Rejoice, treasury of His Providence!
Rejoice, thou who showest philosophers to be fools!
Rejoice, thou who exposest the
learned as irrational!
Rejoice, for the clever critics have
become foolish!
Rejoice, for the writers of myths
have faded away!
Rejoice, thou who didst rend the
webs of the Athenians!
Rejoice, thou who didst fill the nets
of the fishermen!
Rejoice, thou who drawest us from
the depths of ignorance!
Rejoice, thou who enlightenest
many with knowledge I 
-306-
Rejoice, ship for those who wish to
be saved!
Rejoice, harbor for sailors on the
sea of life!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unweddedl
Kontakion 10
D
esiring to save the world, He that
is the Creator of all came to it
according to His Own promise, and
He that, as God, is the Shepherd, for
our sake appeared unto us as a man;
for, like calling unto like, as God He
heareth: Alleluia!
Ekos 10
A bulwark art thou to virgins, and
to all that flee unto thee, 0
Virgin Theotokos; for the Maker of
heaven and earth prepared thee, 0
most pure one, dwelt in thy womb, and
taught all to call to thee:
Rejoice, pillar of virginity!
Rejoice, gate of salvation! 
-307-
Rejoice, leader of mental formation!
Rejoice, bestower of divine good!
Rejoice, for thou didst renew those
conceived in shame!
Rejoice, for thou gavest understanding to those robbed of their
minds!
Rejoice, thou who didst foil the corrupter of minds!
Rejoice, thou who gavest birth to
the Sower of purity!
Rejoice, bridechamber of a seedless
marriage!
Rejoice, thou who dost wed the
faithful to the Lord!
Rejoice, good nourisher of virgins!
Rejoice, adorner of holy souls as for
marriage!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unweddedl
Kontakion 11
E
very hymn is defeated that trieth to
encompass the multitude of Thy 
-308-
many compassions; for if we offer to
Thee, 0 Holy King, songs equal in
number to the sand, nothing have we
done worthy of that which Thou hast
given us who shout to Thee: Alleluia!
Ekos 11
We behold the holy Virgin, a shining lamp appearing to those in
darkness; for, kindling the Immaterial
Light, she guideth all to divine knowledge, she illumineth minds with radiance, and is honoured by our shouting
these things:
Rejoice, ray of the noetic Sun!
Rejoice, radiance of the Unsetting
Light!
Rejoice, lightning that enlightenest
our souls!
Rejoice, thunder that terrifiest our
enemies!
Rejoice, for thou didst cause the
Refulgent Light to dawn! 
-309-
Rejoice, for thou didst cause the
river of many streams to
gush forth!
Rejoice, thou who paintest the
image of the font!
Rejoice, thou who blottest out the
stain of sin!
Rejoice, laver that washest the conscience clean!
Rejoice, cup that drawest up joy!
Rejoice, aroma of the sweet fragrance of Christ!
Rejoice, life of mystical gladness!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unweddedl
Kontakion 12
"{ A 7hen the Absolver of all mankind
V V desired to blot out ancient debts,
of His Own will He came to dwell
among those who had fallen from His
grace; and having torn up the handwriting of their sins, He heareth this
from all: Alleluia! 
-310-
Ekos 12
"l A ]bile singing to thine Offspring,
V V we all praise thee as a living temple, 0 Theotokos; for the Lord Who
holdeth all things in His hand dwelt in
thy womb, and He sanctified and glorified thee, and taught all to cry to thee:
Rejoice, tabernacle of God the
Word!
Rejoice, saint greater than the
saints!
Rejoice, ark gilded by the Spirit!
Rejoice, inexhaustible treasury of
life!
Rejoice, precious diadem of pious
kings!
Rejoice, venerable boast of reverent
priests!
Rejoice, unshakable fortress of the
Church!
Rejoice, inviolable wall of the kingdom! 
-311-
Rejoice, thou through whom victories are obtained!
Rejoice, thou through whom foes
fall prostrate I
Rejoice, healing of my flesh!
Rejoice, salvation of my soul!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 13
0 all-praised Mother who didst
bear the Word holiest of all the
saints, accept now our offering, and
deliver us from all misfortune, and rescue from the torment to come those
that cry to thee: Alleluia! This kontakion
we say thrice. Then:
Ekos 1
An archangel was sent from heaven .1"\... to say to the Theotokos: Rejoice!
And beholding Thee, 0 Lord, taking
bodily form, he was amazed and with
his bodiless voice he stood crying to
her such things as these: 
-312-
Rejoice, thou through whom joy
will shine forth!
Rejoice, thou through whom the
curse will cease I
Rejoice, recall of fallen Adam!
Rejoice, redemption of the tears of
Eve!
Rejoice, height inaccessible to
human thought!
Rejoice, depth indiscernible even
for the eyes of angels!
Rejoice, for thou art the King's
throne!
Rejoice, for thou hearest Him Who
beareth alll
Rejoice, star that causest the Sun to
appear!
Rejoice, womb of the Divine
Incarnation!
Rejoice, thou through whom creation is renewed!
Rejoice, thou through whom we 
- 313-
worship the Creator!
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 1
T
o Thee, the Champion Leader, we
thy servants dedicate a feast of victory and of thanksgiving as ones rescued out of sufferings, 0 Theotokos;
but as thou art one with might which is
invincible, from all dangers that can be
do thou deliver us, that we may cry to
thee:
Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos
0 most holy Sovereign Lady Theotokos! Higher art thou than all
the angels and archangels, and more
honourable than all creation, a helper
of the wronged art thou, the hope of
the hopeless, an intercessor for the
poor, the consolation of the sorrowful,
a nourisher of the hungry, a robe for 
-314-
the naked, healing for the sick, the salvation of sinners, the help and protection of all Christians. 0 all-merciful
Sovereign Lady Virgin Theotokos!
Through thy mercy save and have
mercy on the most holy Orthodox
patriarchs, the most holy metropolitans, archbishops and bishops, and all
the priestly and monastic orders, the
military leaders, civic leaders, and
Christ-loving armed forces, and wellwishers, and all Orthodox Christians
do thou defend by thy precious omophorion, and entreat, 0 Lady, Christ
our God Who was incarnate of thee
without seed, that He gird us with His
power from on high against our enemies, visible and invisible, 0 all-merciful Sovereign Lady Theotokos! Raise
us up out of the depths of sin, and
deliver us from famine, destruction,
from earthquake and flood, from fire 
-315-
and the sword, from invasion of aliens
and civil war, and from sudden death,
and from noxious winds, and from
death-bearing plagues, and from all
evil. Grant, 0 Lady, peace and health
to thy servants, all Orthodox Christians, and enlighten their minds, and
the eyes of their hearts unto salvation;
and vouchsafe unto us, thy sinful ser-
, vants, the kingdom of thy Son, Christ
our God: for blessed and most-glorified is His dominion, together with His
unoriginate Father, and His Most-holy
, and good and life-creating Spirit, now
and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen. 
-316-
CANON OF REPENTANCE
To our Lord Jesus Christ
Sixth Tone. ODE I
Eirmos: When Israel walked on foot in the
deep as on dry land, on seeing their pursuer
Pharaoh drowned, they cried: Let us sing to
God a song of victory.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Now I, a burdened sinner, have
approached Thee, my Lord and God.
But I dare not raise mine eyes to heaven. I only pray, saying: Give me, 0
Lord, understanding, that I may weep
bitterly over my deeds.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me. 
-317-
0 woe is me, a sinner! Wretched
am I above all men. There is no
repentance in me. Give me, 0 Lord,
tears, that I may weep bitterly over my
deeds.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spi,rit.
Foolish, wretched man, thou art
wasting thy time in idleness! Think of
thy life and turn to the Lord God, and
weep bitterly over thy deeds.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Theotokion: 0 most pure Mother of
God, look upon me a sinner, and
deliver me from the snares of the devil,
and guide me to the way of repentance, that I may weep bitterly over my
deeds.
ODE III
Eirmos: There is none holy as Thou, 0
Lord my God, Who hast exalted the horn of
Thy faithful, 0 Good One, and hast established us upon the rock of Thy confession. 
-318-
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
When the thrones will be set at the
dread judgment, then the deeds of all
men shall be laid bare. There will be
woe for sinners being sent to torment!
And knowing that, my soul, repent of
thine evil deeds.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
The righteous shall rejoice, but the
sinners will weep. Then no one will be
able to help us, but our deeds will condemn us. Wherefore, before the end,
repent of thine evil deeds.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit.
Alas for me, a great sinner, who
have defiled myself by my deeds and
thoughts. Not a teardrop do I have,
because of my hardheartedness. But
now, rise from the earth, my soul, and
repent of thine evil deeds.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen. 
-319-
Theotokion: Behold, thy Son calleth,
0 Lady, and directeth us to what is
good, yet I a sinner always flee from
the good. But do thou, 0 merciful
one, have mercy on me, that I may
repent of mine evil deeds.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Sessional Hymn, Sixth Tone:
I think of the terrible day and weep
over mine evil deeds. How shall I
answer the Immortal King? With what
boldness shall I, a prodigal, look at the
Judge? 0 compassionate Father, 0
Only-begotten Son, and Holy Spirit,
have mercy on me.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen. -
Theotokion: Bound now with many
fetters of sins, and held fast by cruel
passions, I flee unto thee, my salvation,
and cry aloud: Help me, 0 Virgin
1 Mother of God. 
-320-
ODE IV
Eirmos: Christ is my power, my God and
my Lord, doth the august Church sing in godly
fashion, and she doth cry out with a pure
mind, keeping festival in the Lord.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Broad is the way here and convenient for indulging in pleasures, but
how bitter it will be on the last day
when the soul is separated from the
body! Beware of these things, 0 man,
for the sake of the kingdom of God.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Why dost thou wrong the poor
man? Why dost thou withhold the
wage of the hired servant? Why dost
thou not love thy brother? Why dost
thou pursue lust and pride? Therefore, abandon these things, my soul,
and repent for the sake of the kingdom of God.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to ti~
Holy Spirit.
0 mindless man! How long wilt 
-321-
thou busy thyself like a bee, collecting
thy wealth? For it will soon perish like
dust and ashes. But seek rather the
kingdom of God.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Theotokion: 0 Lady Theotokos,
have mercy on me, a sinner, and
strengthen and keep me in virtue, lest
sudden death snatch me away unprepared; and lead me, 0 Virgin, to the
kingdom of God.
ODE V
Eirmos: With Thy divine light, 0 Good
One, illumine the souls of them that rise early
to pray to Thee with love, I pray, that they may
know Thee, 0 Word of God, as the true God,
Who recalleth us from the darkness of sin.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Remember, wretched man, how
thou art enslaved to lies, slander, theft,
infirmities, wild beasts, on account of
sins. 0 my sinful soul, is this what thou
hast desired? 
-322-
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
My members tremble, for with all of
them I have done wrong: with mine
eyes in looking, with mine ears in hear- 1
ing, with my tongue in speaking evil,
and by surrendering the whole of . myself to Gehenna. 0 my sinful soul, I is this what thou hast desired?
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit.
Thou didst receive the prodigal and ,
I the thief who repented, 0 Saviour, and ,
I alone have succumbed to sinful sloth
and have become enslaved to evil
deeds. 0 my sinful soul, is this what
thou hast desired?
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Theotokion: Wonderful and speedy
helper of all men, help me, 0 Mother
of God, unworthy as I am, for my sinful
soul hath desired this. 
-323-
ODE VI
Eirmos: Beholding the sea of life surging
with the tempest of temptations, I run to Thy
calm haven and cry unto Thee: Raise up my
life from corruption, 0 Greatly-merciful One.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
I have lived my life wantonly on
earth and have given my soul over to
darkness. But now I implore Thee, 0
merciful Master, free me from this
work of the enemy and give me the
knowledge to do Thy will.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Who doeth such things as I do? For
like a swine lying in the mud, so do I
serve sin. But do Thou, 0 Lord, pull
me out of this vileness and give me the
heart to do Thy commandments.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit.
Rise, wretched man, to God and,
remembering thy sins, fall down
before the Creator, weeping and
groaning, for He is merciful and will 
-324-
grant thee to know His will.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Theotokion: 0 Virgin Theotokos,
protect me from evil visible and invisi1
ble, 0 immaculate one, and accept my
prayers and present them to thy Son,
that He may grant me the mind to do
His will.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
Kontakion: 0 my soul, why dost
thou become rich in sins? Why dost
thou do the will of the devil? On what
dost thou set thy hope? Cease from
these things and turn to God with
weeping, and cry out: 0 kindhearted
Lord, have mercy on me a sinner.
Ekos: Think, my soul, of the bitter
hour of death and the judgment day of
thy God and Creator. For terrible 
-325-
angels will seize thee, my soul, and will
lead thee into the eternal fire. And so,
before thy death, repent and cry: 0
Lord, have mercy on me a sinner.
ODE VII
Eirmos: An angel made the furnace sprinkle dew on the righteous youths. But the command of God consumed the Chaldeans and
prevailed upon the tyrant to cry: Blessed art
Thou, 0 God of our fathers.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Put not thy hope, my soul, in corruptible wealth, and in what is unjustly
collected. For thou dost not know to
whom thou wilt leave it all. But cry
aloud: Have mercy, 0 Christ God, on
me the unworthy.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Trust not, my soul, in health of body
and quickly-passing beauty. For thou
seest that the strong and the young
die. But cry aloud: Have mercy, 0
Christ God, on me the unworthy. 
-326-
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit.
Remember, my soul, eternal life and
the heavenly kingdom prepared for
the saints, and the outer darkness and
the wrath of God for the evil, and cry:
Have mercy, 0 Christ God, on me the
unworthy.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Theotokion: Fall down, my soul,
before the Mother of God, and pray to
her; for she is the quick helper of those
that repent. She entreateth the Son,
Christ God, and hath mercy on me the
unworthy.
ODE VIII
Eirmos: From the flame Thou didst sprinkle dew upon the Saints, and didst burn the
sacrifice of a righteous man which was sprinkled with water. For Thou alone, 0 Christ,
dost do all as Thou willest. Thee do we exalt
unto all ages.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me. 
-327-
How shall I not weep when I think of
death? For I have seen my brother in
his coffin, without glory or comeliness.
What, then, do I expect? And what do I
hope for? Only grant me, 0 Lord,
repentance before the end.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
How shall I not weep .... (Repeat).
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit.
I believe that Thou wilt come to
judge the living and the dead, and that
all will stand in order, old and young,
lords and princes, priests and virgins.
Where shall I find myself? Therefore,
I cry: Grant me, 0 Lord, repentance
before the end.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Theotokion: 0 most pure Theotokos, accept mine unworthy prayer and
preserve me from sudden death, and
grant me repentance before the end. 
-328-
ODE IX
Eirmos: It is not possible for men to see
God, on Whom the ranks of angels dare not
gaze; but through thee, 0 all-pure one,
appeared to men the Word incarnate, Whom
magnifying, with the heavenly hosts we call
thee blessed.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Now I flee unto you, ye Angels,
Archangels, and all the heavenly hosts
who stand at the throne of God: pray
to your Creator that He may deliver my
soul from eternal torment.
Have mercy on me, 0 God, have mercy on me.
Now I turn to you with tears, holy
patriarchs, kings and prophets, apostles and holy hierarchs, and all the
elect of Christ: help me at the judgment, that He may save my soul from
the power of the enemy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit.
Now I lift up my hands to you, holy
martyrs, hermits, virgins, righteous 
-329-
ones and all the saints, who pray to the
Lord for the whole world, that He may
have mercy on me at the hour of my
death.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Theotokion: 0 Mother of God,
help me who have strong hope in thee;
implore thy Son that He may place me
the unworthy on His right hand, when
He sitteth to judge the living and the
dead. Amen.
PRAYER AFfER THE CANON
0 Master Christ God, Who hast
healed my passions through Thy
Passion, and hast cured my wounds
through Thy wounds: Grant me, who
have sinned greatly against Thee, tears
of compunction. Transform my body
with the fragrance of Thy life-giving
Body, and sweeten my soul with Thy
precious Blood from the bitterness with
which the foe hath fed me. Lift up my 
-330-
downcast mind to Thee, and take it out
of the abyss of perdition, for I have no
repentance, I have no compunction, I
have no consoling tears which uplift
children to their heritage. My mind
hath been darkened through earthly
passions, I cannot look up to Thee in
pain, I cannot warm myself with tears
of love for Thee. But, 0 Sovereign Lord
Jesus Christ, Treasury of good things,
give me thorough repentance and a
diligent heart to seek Thee; grant me
Thy grace, and renew in me the likeness of Thine image. I have forsaken
Thee-do Thou not forsake me!
Come out to seek me; lead me up to
Thy pasturage and number me among
the sheep of Thy chosen flock.
Nourish me with them on the grass of
Thy Holy Mysteries, through the intercessions of Thy most pure Mother and
all Thy saints. Amen. 
-331-
THE ORDER OF PREPARATION
FOR HOLY COMMUNION
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, 0
Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.
Amen.
Glory to Thee, our God, glory to
Thee.
0 Heavenly King.... Trisagfon ....
Glory.... Both now.... 0 Most Holy
Trinity .... Lord, have mercy, thrice.
Glory.... Both now.... Our Father ....
Lord, have mercy, twelve. Glory .... Both
now .... 0 come let us worship ... , thrice.
And these Psalms:
PSALM 22
T
he Lord is my shepherd, and I
shall not want. In a place of green 
-332-
pasture, there hath He made me to
dwell; beside the water of rest hath He
nurtured me. He hath converted my
soul, He hath led me on the paths of
righteousness for His name's sake. For
though I should walk in the midst of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy
staff, they have comforted me. Thou
hast prepared a table before me in the
presence of them that afflict me. Thou
hast anointed my head with oil, and
Thy cup which filleth me, how excellent it is! And Thy mercy shall pursue
me all the days of my life, and I will
dwell in the house of the Lord unto
length of days.
PSALM 23
T
he earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof, the world, and all
that dwell therein. He hath founded it
upon the seas, and upon the rivers 
-333-
hath He prepared it. Who shall ascend
into the mountain of the Lord? Or
who shall stand in His holy place? He
that is innocent in hands and pure in
heart, who hath not received his soul
in vain, and hath not sworn deceitfully
to his neighbour. Such a one shall
receive a blessing from the Lord, and
mercy from God his Saviour. This is
the generation of them that seek the
Lord, of them that seek the face of the
God of Jacob. Lift up your gates, 0 ye
princes; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting gates, and the King of Glory
shall enter in. Who is this King of
Glory? The Lord strong and mighty,
the Lord, mighty in war. Lift up your
gates, 0 ye princes; and be ye lifted up,
ye everlasting gates, and the King of
Glory shall enter in. Who is this King
of Glory? The Lord of hosts, He is the
King of Glory. 
-334-
PSALM 115
I believed, wherefore I spake; I was
humbled exceedingly. As for me, I
said in mine ecstasy; Every man is a liar.
What shall I render unto the Lord for
all that He hath rendered unto me? I
will take the cup of salvation, and I will
call upon the name of the Lord. My
vows unto the Lord will I pay in the
presence of all His people. Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of His
saints. 0 Lord, I am Thy servant; I am
Thy servant and the son of Thy handmaid. Thou hast broken my bonds
asunder. I will sacrifice a sacrifice of
praise unto Thee, and I will call upon
the name of the Lord. My vows unto
the Lord will I pay in the presence of
all His people, in the courts of the
house of the Lord, in the midst of
thee, 0 Jerusalem.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, 
-335-
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to
Thee, 0 God. Thrice.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Troparia, Eighth Tone: Disregard
my transgressions, 0 Lord Who wast
born of a Virgin, and purify my heart,
and make it a temple for Thy spotless
Body and Blood. Let me not be rejected
from Thy presence, 0 Thou Who hast
great mercy without meassure.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
How can I who am unworthy dare to
come to the Communion of Thy Holy
Things? For if I should dare to
approach Thee with those that are
worthy, my garment betrayeth me, for
it is not a festal robe, and I shall cause
the condemnation of my greatly-sinful
soul. Cleanse, 0 Lord, the pollution
from my soul, and save me, as Thou art 
-336-
the Lover of mankind.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Greatly multiplied, 0 Theotokos,
are my sins; unto thee have I fled, 0
pure one, imploring salvation. Do
thou visit mine enfeebled soul, and
pray to thy Son and our God that He
grant me forgiveness for the evil I have
done, 0 thou only blessed one.
During Holy and Great Lent say this:
When the glorious disciples were
enlightened at the washing of the feet,
thenjudas the ungodly one was stricken and darkened with the love of silver.
And unto the lawless judges did he
deliver Thee, the Righteous Judge.
Behold, 0 lover of money, him that for
the sake thereof did hang himself; flee
from that insatiable soul that dared
such things against the Master. 0
Thou Who art good unto all, Lord,
glory be to Thee. 
-337-
PSALM 50
H
ave mercy on me, 0 God, according to Thy great mercy; and
according to the multitude of Thy
compassions blot out my transgression.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For
I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever
before me. Against Thee only have I
sinned and done this evil before Thee,
that Thou mightest be justified in Thy
words, and prevail when Thou art
judged. For behold, I was conceived in
iniquities, and in sins did my mother
bear me. For behold, Thou hast loved
truth; the hidden and secret things of
Thy wisdom hast Thou made manifest
unto me. Thou shalt sprinkle me with
hyssop, and I shall be made clean;
Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be
made whiter than snow. Thou shalt
make me to hear joy and gladness; the 
-338-
bones that be humbled, they shall
rejoice. Turn Thy face away from my
sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God,
and renew a right spirit within me.
Cast me not away from Thy presence,
and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with Thy governing Spirit
establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the ungodly shall
turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from
blood-guiltiness, 0 God, Thou God of
my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice
in Thy righteousness. 0 Lord, Thou
shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall
declare Thy praise. For if Thou hadst
desired sacrifice, I had given it; with
whole-burnt offerings Thou shalt not
be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a
broken spirit; a heart that is broken
and humbled God will not despise. Do 
-339-
good, 0 Lord, in Thy good pleasure
unto Sion, and let the walls of
Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt
Thou be pleased with sacrifice of righteousness, with oblation and wholeburnt offerings. Then shall they offer
bullocks upon Thine altar.
And immediately:
The Canon for Holy Communion
Second Tone
ODE I
Eirmos: Come, 0 ye people, let us sing a
hymn to Christ our God, Who divided the sea
and guided the people whom He brought out
of the bondage of Egypt, for He is glorified.
Refrain: Create in me a clean heart, 0
God, and renew a right spirit within me.
May Thy holy Body be unto me the
Bread of life eternal, 0 compassionate
Lord, and Thy precious Blood be also
the healing of many forms of illness.
Refrain: Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
Defiled by unseemly deeds, I the 
-340-
wretched one am unworthy, 0 Christ,
of the communion of Thy most pure
Body and divine Blood, which do
Thou vouchsafe me.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
0 blessed Bride of God, 0 good soil
that grew the Corn untilled and saving
to the world, vouchsafe me to be saved
by eating it.
ODE III
Eirmos: By establishing me on the rock of
faith, Thou hast enlarged my mouth over mine
enemies, for my spirit rejoiceth when I sing:
There is none holy as our God, and none
righteous beside Thee, 0 Lord.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, and
renew a right spirit within me.
Teardrops grant me, 0 Christ, to
cleanse my defiled heart, that, purified
and with a good conscience, I may
come with faith and fear, 0 Master, to
the communion of Thy divine Gifts. 
-341-
Cast me not away from Thy presence, and
take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
May Thy most pure Body and divine
Blood be unto me for remission of sins,
for communion with the Holy Spirit,
and unto life eternal, 0 Lover of mankind, and to the estrangement of passions and sorrows.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
0 thou most holy table of the Bread
of Life that for mercy's sake came
down from on high, giving new life to
the world, vouchsafe even me, the
unworthy, to eat it with fear, and live.
ODE IV
Eirmos: From a Virgin didst Thou come,
not as an ambassador nor as an angel, but the
very Lord Himself incarnate, and didst save
me, the whole man. Wherefore, I cry to Thee:
Glory to Thy power, 0 Lord.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, and
renew a right spirit within me. 
-342-
0 Thou Who wast incarnate for our
sake, 0 Most-merciful One, Thou didst
will to be slain as a sheep for the sin of
mankind. Wherefore, I entreat Thee
to blot out my sins also.
Cast me not away from Thy presence, and
take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
Heal the wounds of my soul, 0 Lord,
and sanctify all of me, and vouchsafe,
0 Master, that I the wretched one may
partake of Thy divine Mystical Supper.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
Propitiate for me also Him that
came from thy womb, 0 Lady, and
keep me, thy servant, undefiled and
blameless, so that by obtaining the
spiritual Pearl I may be sanctified.
ODE V
Eirmos: 0 Lord, Give of light and Creator
of the ages, guide us in the light of Thy commandments, for we know none other God
beside Thee. 
-343-
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, and
renew a right spirit within me.
As Thou didst foretell, 0 Christ, so
let it be unto Thy wicked servant, and
in me abide, as Thou didst promise;
for behold, I eat Thy divine Body and
drink Thy Blood.
Cast me not away from Thy presence, and
take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
0 Word of God and God, may the
live coal of Thy Body be unto the enlightenment of me who am in darkness, and Thy Blood unto the cleansing of my defiled soul.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
0 Mary, Mother of God, precious
tabernacle of fragrance, through thy
prayers make me a chosen vessel, that I
may partake of the Sacrament of thy
Son.
ODE VI
Eirmos: Whirled about in the abyss of sin, 
-344-
I appeal to the unfathomable abyss of Thy compassion: From corruption raise me up, 0 God.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, and
renew a right spirit within me.
0 Saviour, sanctify my mind, my
soul, my heart, and my body, and muchsafe me uncondemned, 0 Master, to
approach the fearful Mysteries.
Cast me not away from Thy presence, and
take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
Grant that I may be rid of passions,
and have the assistance of Thy grace,
and strengthening of life by the communion of Thy Holy Mysteries, 0 Christ.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
0 Holy Word of God and God, sanctify all of me as I now come to Thy
divine Mysteries, through the prayers
of Thy holy Mother.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen. 
-345-
Kontakion, Second Tone: Count me
not unworthy, 0 Christ, to receive now
the Bread which is Thy Body, and Thy
divine Blood, and to partake, 0
Master, of Thy most pure and dread
Mysteries, wretched though I be. Let
these not be for me unto judgment,
but unto life immortal and everlasting.
ODE VII
Eirmos: The wise children did not serve
the golden image, but went themselves into
the flame and reviled the pagan gods. They
cried in the midst of the flame, and the angel
bedewed them: Already the prayer of your lips
was heard.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, and
renew a right spirit within me.
May the communion of Thine immortal Mysteries, the source of blessings,
0 Christ, be to me now light, and life,
and dispassion, and for progress and
increase in the most divine virtues, 0
only Good One, that I may glorify Thee. 
-346-
Cast me not away from Thy presence, and
take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
That I may be delivered from passions, and enemies, need, and every
sorrow, I now draw nigh with trembling, love, and reverence, 0 Lover of
mankind, to Thine immortal and divine
Mysteries. Vouchsafe me to hymn Thee:
Blessed art Thou, 0 Lord God of our
fathers.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
0 thou who art full of grace, who
beyond understanding gavest birth to
Christ the Saviour, I thy servant, the
impure, now entreat thee, the pure:
Cleanse me, who am now about to
approach the most pure Mysteries,
from all defilement of flesh and spirit.
ODE VIII
Eirmos: God Who descended into the fiery
furnace unto the Hebrew children, and
changed the flame into dew, praise Him as 
-347-
Lord, 0 ye works, and supremely exalt Him
unto all ages.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, and
renew a right spirit within me.
Of Thy heavenly and dread holy
Mysteries, 0 Christ, and of Thy divine
Mystical Supper vouchsafe now even
me, the despairing one, to partake, 0
God my Saviour.
Cast me not away from Thy presence, and
take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
Fleeing for refuge to Thy lovingkindness, 0 Good One, with fear I cry
unto Thee: Abide in me, 0 Saviour,
and I, as Thou hast said, in Thee. For
behold, presuming on Thy mercy, I eat
Thy Body and drink Thy Blood.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
I tremble at taking fire, lest I be consumed as wax and grass. 0 fearful
Mystery! 0 the loving-kindness of God!
How is it that I, being but clay, partake 
-348-
of the divine Body and Blood, and am
made incorruptible?
ODE IX
Eirmos: The Son of the unongmate
Father, God, and Lord, hath appeared unto us
incarnate of the Virgin, to enlighten those in
darkness and to gather the dispersed.
Wherefore, the all-hymned Theotokos do we
magnify.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, and
renew a right spirit within me.
Christ It is, 0 taste and see! The
Lord for our sake made like unto us of
old, once offered Himself as an offering to His Father, and is ever slain,
sanctifying them that partake.
Cast me not away from Thy presence, and
take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
May I be sanctified in soul and body,
0 Master, may I be enlightened, may I
be saved, may I become Thy dwelling
through the communion of Thy holy
Mysteries, having Thee with the Father
and the Spirit living in me, 0 
-349-
Benefactor plenteous in mercy.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
May Thy Body and Thy most precious Blood, 0 my Saviour, be unto me
as fire and light, consuming the substance of sin, and burning the thorns
of passions, and enlightening all of me
to worship Thy Divinity.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
God took flesh of thy pure blood;
wherefore, all generations do hymn
thee, 0 Lady, and throngs of heavenly
minds glorify thee, for through thee
they have clearly seen Him Who ruleth
all things endued with human nature.
And immediately: It is truly meet ... Trisagion.
0 Most Holy Trinity... Our Father ... And the
troparion of the day, if it be the feast of the Lord's
Nativity. If it be Sunday, the Sunday troparion of
the tone. If not, these:
Sixth Tone: Have mercy on us, 0
Lord, have mercy on us; for at a loss for 
-350-
any defence, this prayer do we sinners
offer unto Thee as Master: have mercy
on us.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Lord, have mercy on us, for we have
hoped in Thee, be not angry with us
greatly, neither remember our iniquities; but look upon us now as Thou art
compassionate, and deliver us from
our enemies; for Thou art our God,
and we, Thy people; all are the works
of Thy hands, and we call upon Thy
name.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
The door of compassion open unto
us, 0 blessed Theotokos, for, hoping
in thee, let us not perish; through thee
may we be delivered from adversities,
for thou art the salvation of the
Christian race.
Then: Lord, have mercy. Forty times. 
-351-
And reverences [bows, prostrations], as many as
thou desirest.
And thereafter these lines:
If thou desirest, 0 man, to eat the Body of
the Master,
Approach with fear, lest thou be burnt:
for It is fire.
And when thou drinkest the Divine Blood
unto communion,
First be reconciled to them that have
grieved thee,
Then dare to eat the Mystical Food.
Other lines:
Before partaking of the awesome Sacrifice
Of the life-giving Body of the Master,
After this manner pray with trembling.
A Prayer of Basil the Great, 1:
0 Master Lord Jesus Christ our
God, Source of life and immortality, Creator of all things visible and
invisible, the co-eternal and co-unoriginate Son of the unoriginate Father,
Who out of Thy great goodness, didst
in the latter days clothe Thyself in
flesh, and wast crucified, and buried 
-352-
for us ungrateful and evil-disposed
ones, and hast renewed with Thine
Own Blood our nature corrupted by
sin: Do Thou Thyself, 0 Immortal
King, accept the repentance of me a
sinner, and incline Thine ear to me,
and hearken unto my words. For I
have sinned against heaven and before
Thee, and I am not worthy to look
upon the height of Thy glory; for I
have angered Thy goodness by trans- ,
gressing Thy commandments and not
obeying Thine injunctions. But Thou,
0 Lord, Who art not vengeful, but longsuffering and plenteous in mercy, hast
not given me over to be destroyed with
my sins, but always Thou awaitest my
complete conversion. For Thou hast
said, 0 Lover of mankind, through Thy
prophet: For I desire not the death of
the sinner, but that he should return
and live. For Thou desirest not, 0 
-353-
Master, to destroy the work of Thy
hands, neither shalt Thou be pleased
with the destruction of men, but
desirest that all be saved and come to a
knowledge of the truth. Wherefore,
even I, although unworthy of heaven
and earth, and of this temporal life,
having submitted my whole self to sin,
and made myself a slave of pleasure,
and having defaced Thine image, yet
being Thy work and creation, wretched
though I be, I despair not of my salvation, and dare to approach Thine immeasurable loving-kindness. Accept,
then, even me, 0 Lord, Lover of mankind, as Thou didst accept the sinful
woman, the thief, the publican and the
prodigal; and take away the heavy burden of my sins, Thou that takest away
the sin of the world, and healest the
infirmities of mankind; Who callest the
weary and heavy-laden unto Thyself 
-354-
and givest them rest, Who earnest not
to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. And do Thou cleanse me
from all defilement of flesh and spirit,
and teach me to achieve holiness in
fear of Thee; that with the pure testimony of my conscience, receiving a
portion of Thy Holy Things, I may be
united unto Thy holy Body and Blood,
and have Thee living and abiding in
me with the Father and Thy Holy
Spirit. Yea, 0 Lord Jesus Christ my God,
let not the communion of Thine
immaculate and life-giving Mysteries
be unto me for judgment, neither unto
infirmity of soul and body because of
my partaking of them unworthily; but
grant me until my last breath to receive
without condemnation the portion of
Thy Holy Things, unto communion
with the Holy Spirit, as a provision for
life eternal, for an acceptable defence 
-355-
at Thy dread judgment seat; so that I
also, with all Thine elect, may become
a partaker of Thine incorruptible
blessings, which Thou hast prepared
for them that love Thee, 0 Lord, in
whom Thou art glorified unto the
ages. Amen.
A Prayer of Our Father among the
Saints, John Chrysostom, 2:
0 Lord my God, I know that I am
not worthy nor sufficient that
Thou shouldest enter beneath the roof
of the temple of my soul, for all is
empty and fallen, and Thou hast not in
me a place worthy to lay Thy head; but
as from on high Thou didst humble
Thyself for our sake, do Thou now also
lower Thyself to my lowliness; and as
Thou didst consent to lie in a cave and
in a manger of dumb beasts, so consent also to lie in the manger of mine
irrational soul, and to enter into my 
-356-
defiled body. And as Thou didst not
refuse to enter and to dine with sinners in the house of Simon the Leper,
so deign also to enter into the house of
my lowly soul, leprous and sinful. And
as Thou didst not reject the harlot and
sinner like me, when she came and
touched Thee, so be compassionate
also with me a sinner, as I approach
and touch Thee. And as Thou didst
feel no loathing for the defiled and
unclean lips of her that kissed Thee,
do Thou also not loathe my defiled lips
nor mine abominable and impure
mouth, and my polluted and unclean
tongue. But let the fiery coal of Thy
most holy Body and Thy precious
Blood be unto me for sanctification
and enlightenment, and health for my
lowly soul and body, unto the lightening of the burden of my many sins, for
preservation from every act of the 
-357-
devil, for the expulsion and prohibition of mine evil and wicked habits,
unto the mortification of the passions,
unto the keeping of Thy commandments, unto the application of Thy
divine grace, unto the acquiring of Thy
kingdom. For not with disdain do I
approach Thee, 0 Christ God, but as
one trusting in Thine ineffable goodness, and that I may not by much
abstaining from Thy communion
become the prey of the spiritual wolf.
Wherefore do I entreat Thee, for Thou
art the only Holy One, 0 Master: sanctify my soul and body, my mind and
heart, my belly and inward parts, and
renew me entirely. -And implant Thy
fear in my members, and make Thy
sanctification inalienable from me,
and be unto me a helper and defender, guiding my life in peace, vouchsafing me also to stand at Thy right hand 
-358-
with Thy saints, through the intercessions and supplications of Thy most
pure Mother, of Thine immaterial
ministers and immaculate hosts, and of
all the saints who from the ages have
been pleasing unto Thee. Amen.
Another Prayer, of Symeon
Metaphrastes, 3:
0 only pure and sinless Lord, Who
through the ineffable compassion of Thy love for mankind didst take
on all of our substance from the pure
and virgin blood of her that bare Thee
supernaturally through the descent of
the Divine Spirit and the good will of
the everlasting Father; 0 Christ Jesus,
Wisdom of God, and Peace, and
Power, Thou Who through the
assumption of our nature didst take
upon Thyself Thy life-giving and saving
Passion - the Cross, the nails, the
spear, and death: mortify the soul-cor-
-359-
rupting passions of my body. Thou
Who by Thy burial didst lead captive
the kingdom of hades, bury with good
thoughts mine evil schemes, and
destroy the spirits of evil. Thou Who
by Thy life-bearing Resurrection on
the third day didst raise up our fallen
forefather, raise me up who have
slipped down into sin, setting before
me the ways of repentance. Thou Who
by Thy most glorious Ascension didst
deify the flesh that Thou hadst taken,
and didst honour it with a seat at the
right hand of the Father, vouchsafe me
through partaking of Thy holy
Mysteries to obtain a place at Thy right
hand among them that are saved. 0
Thou Who by the descent of Thy
Spirit, the Comforter, didst make Thy
holy disciples worthy vessels, show me
also to be a receptacle of His coming.
Thou Who art to come again to judge 
-360-
the world in righteousness, deign to let
me also meet Thee on the clouds, my
Judge and Creator, with all Thy saints;
that I may endlessly glorify and praise
Thee, with Thine unoriginate Father,
and Thy Most-holy and good and lifecreating Spirit, now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
Of the divine Damascene, 4:
0 Master Lord Jesus Christ our
God, Who alone hast authority to
remit the sins of men: Do Thou, as the
Good One and Lover of mankind,
overlook all mine offences, whether
committed with knowledge or in ignorance. And vouchsafe me to partake
without condemnation of Thy Divine,
glorious, immaculate, and life-giving
Mysteries; not as a burden, nor for
punishment, nor for an increase of
sins, but unto purification and sanctification, and as a pledge of the life and 
-361-
kingdom to come, as a bulwark and
help, and for the destruction of enemies, and for the blotting out of my
many transgressions. For Thou art a
God of mercy, and compassion, and
love for mankind, and unto Thee do
we send up glory, with the Father, and
the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and
unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Of Basil the Great, 5:
I know, 0 Lord, that I partake
un-worthily of Thine immaculate
Body and Thy precious Blood, and that
I am guilty, and eat and drink damnation to myself, not discerning the Body
and Blood of Thee, my Christ and
God; but taking - courage from
Thy compassion I approach Thee Who
hast said: He that eateth My Flesh, and
drinketh My Blood, abideth in Me, and
I in him. Show compassion, therefore,
0 Lorcl, and do not accuse me, a sinner, 
-362-
but deal with me according to Thy
mercy; and let these Holy Things be
for me unto healing, and purification,
and enlightenment, and preservation,
and salvation, and unto sanctification
of soul and body; unto the driving away
of every phantasy, and evil practice,
and activity of the devil working
mentally in my members; unto confidence and love toward Thee, unto correction of life, unto steadfastness, unto
an increase of virtue and perfection,
unto fulfillment of the commandments,
unto communion with the Holy Spirit,
as a provision for life eternal, as an
acceptable defence at Thy dread
tribunal, not unto judgment or condemnation.
A Prayer of Saint Symeon
the New Theologian, 6:
F
rom sullied lips, from an abominable heart, from a tongue im-
-363-
pure, from a soul defiled, accept my
supplication, 0 my Christ, and disdain
me not, neither my words, nor my
ways, nor my shamelessness. Grant me
to say boldly that which I desire, 0 my
Christ. Or rather, teach me what I
ought to do and say. I have sinned
more than the sinful woman who, having learned where Thou wast lodging,
bought myrrh, and came daringly to
anoint Thy feet, my God, my Master,
and my Christ. As Thou didst not
reject her when she drew near from
her heart, neither, 0 Word, be Thou
filled with loathing for me, but grant
me Thy feet to clasp and kiss, and with
floods of tears, as -with most precious
myrrh, dare to anoint them. Wash me
with my tears, and purify me with
them, 0 Word; remit also my transgressions, and grant me pardon. Thou
knowest the multitude of mine evils, 
-364-
Thou knowest also my sores, and Thou
seest my wounds; but also Thou knowest my faith, and Thou beholdest my
good intentions, and Thou hearest my
sighs. Nothing is hidden from Thee, my
God, my Creator, My Redeemer, neither
a teardrop, nor a part of a drop. My
deeds not yet done Thine eyes have
seen, and in Thy book even things not
yet accomplished are written by Thee.
See my lowliness, see my toil, how great
it is, and all my sins take from me, 0
God of all; that with a pure heart, a
trembling mind, and a contrite soul I
may partake of Thy spotless and most
holy Mysteries, by which all that eat
and drink in purity of heart are quickened and deified. For Thou, 0 my
Master, hast said: Everyone that eateth
My Flesh and drinketh My Blood
abideth in Me, and I in him. True is
every word of my Master and God; for 
-365-
whosoever partaketh of the divine and
deifying grace is no more alone, but
with Thee, my Christ, the threesunned Light that enlighteneth the
world. And that I may not remain
alone without Thee, the Life-giver, my
Breath, my Life, my Rejoicing, the
Salvation of the world, therefore have I
drawn nigh unto Thee, as Thou seest,
with tears, and with a contrite soul. 0
Ransom of mine offences, I ask Thee
to receive me, and that I may partake
without condemnation of Thy life-giving and perfect Mysteries, that Thou
mayest remain, as Thou hast said, with
me, a thrice-wretched one, lest the
deceiver, finding ine without Thy
grace, craftily seize me, and having
beguiled me, draw me away from Thy
deifying words. Wherefore, I fall down
before Thee, and fervently cry unto
Thee: As Thou didst receive the prodi-
-366-
gal, and the sinful woman who drew
near, so receive me, the prodigal and
profligate, 0 Compassionate One.
With contrite soul I now come to Thee.
I know, 0 Saviour, that none other
hath sinned against Thee as have I, nor
hath wrought the deeds that I have
done. But this again I know, that neither the magnitude of mine offences
nor the multitude of my sins surpasseth the abundant long-suffering of my
God and His exceeding love for
mankind; but with sympathetic mercy
Thou dost purify and illumine them
that fervently repent, and makest them
partakers of the light, sharers of Thy
divinity without stint. And, strange to
angels and to the minds of men, Thou
conversest with them oftimes, as with
Thy true friends. These things make
me bold, these things give me wings, 0
Christ. And taking courage from the 
-367-
wealth of Thy benefactions to us, rejoicing and trembling at once, I partake of Fire, I that am grass. And,
strange wonder! I am bedewed without
being consumed, as the bush of old
burned without being consumed. Now
with thankful mind, and grateful
heart, with thankfulness in my members, my soul and body, I worship and
magnify and glorify Thee, my God, for
blessed art Thou, both now and unto
the ages.
Another Prayer of Chrysostom, 7:
0 God, loose, remit, and pardon
me my transgressions wherein I
have sinned against Thee, whether by
word, deed, or thought, voluntarily or
involuntarily, consciously or unconsciously; forgive me all, for Thou art
good and the Lover of mankind. And
through the intercessions of Thy most
pure Mother, Thy noetic ministers and 
-368-
holy hosts, and all the saints who from
the ages have been pleasing unto
Thee, deign to allow me without condemnation Thy holy and immacluate
Body and precious Blood, unto the
healing of soul and body, and unto the
purification of mine evil thoughts. For
Thine is the kingdom, and the power,
and the glory, with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto
the ages of ages. Amen.
Of the same, 8: ·
I am not sufficient, 0 Master and
Lord, that Thou shouldst enter
under the roof of my soul; but as Thou
dost will as the Lover of mankind to
dwell in me, I dare to approach Thee.
Thou commandest: I shall open the
doors which Thou alone didst create,
that Thou mayest enter with Thy love
for mankind, as is Thy nature, that
Thou mayest enter and enlighten my 
-369-
darkened thought. I believe that Thou
wilt do this, for Thou didst not drive
away the sinful woman when she came
unto Thee with tears, neither didst
Thou reject the publican who repented, nor didst Thou spurn the thief who
acknowledged Thy kingdom, nor didst
Thou leave the repentant persecutor
to himself; but all of them that came
unto Thee in repentance Thou didst
number among Thy friends, 0 Thou
Who alone art blessed, always, now and
unto endless ages. Amen.
Of the same, 9:
0 Lord Jesus Christ my God, loose,
remit, cleanse, and forgive me,
Thy sinful and unprofitable, and unworthy servant, my transgressions and
offences and fallings into sin, which I
have committed against Thee from my
youth until the present day and hour,
whether consciously or unconsciously, 
-370-
whether by words or deeds, or in
thought or imagination, in habit, and
in all my senses. And through the
intercessions of her that seedlessly
gave Thee birth, the most pure and
Ever-Virgin Mary, Thy Mother, the only
hope that maketh not ashamed, and
my mediation and salvation, vouchsafe
me without condemnation to partake
of Thine immaculate, immortal, lifegiving, and awesome Mysteries, unto
the remission of sins and for life eternal, unto sanctification and enlightenment, strength, healing, and health of
both soul and body, and unto the consumption and complete destruction of
mine evil reasonings and intentions
and prejudices and nocturnal phantasies of dark and evil spirits; for Thine
is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, and the honour, and the worship, with the Father and Thy Holy 
-371-
Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages
of ages. Amen.
Another Prayer of John Damascene,
10:
I stand before the doors of Thy temple, yet I do not put away evil
thoughts. But do Thou, 0 Christ God,
Who didst justify the publican, and
didst have mercy on the woman of
Canaan, and didst open the doors of
paradise to the thief, open unto me
the abyss of Thy love for mankind, and
receive me as I come and touch Thee,
as Thou didst receive the sinful woman
and the woman with an issue of blood.
For the one received healing easily by
touching the hem <of Thy garment,
while the other, by clasping Thy most
pure feet, carried away absolution of
sins. And I, a wretch, daring to receive
Thy whole Body, let me not be consumed by fire; but receive me, as Thou 
-372-
didst receive them, and enlighten my
spiritual senses, burning up my sinful
errors; through the intercessions of
her that seedlessly gave Thee birth,
and of the heavenly hosts, for blessed
art Thou unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Another Prayer of Chrysostom:
I believe, 0 Lord, and I confess that
Thou art truly the Christ, the Son
of the living God, Who came into the
world to save sinners, of whom I am
chief. Moreover, I believe that this is
truly Thy most pure Body, and this is
truly Tirine Own precious Blood; wherefore, I pray Thee: Have mercy on me
and forgive me my transgressions, voluntary and involuntary, whether in
word or deed, in knowledge or in ignorance. And vouchsafe me to partake
without condemnation of Thy most
pure Mysteries, unto the remission of
sins and life everlasting. Amen. 
-373-
M'hen coming to partake, say to thyself
these lines of Metaphrastes:
Behold, I approach the Divine
Communion.
0 Creator, let me not be burnt by
communicating,
For Thou art Fire, consuming the
unworthy.
But, rather, purify me of all impurity.
Then again say:
Of Thy Mystical Supper, 0 Son of
God, receive me today as a communicant; for I will not speak of the Mystery
to Thine enemies; nor will I give Thee
a kiss, as did Judas, but like the thief do
I confess Thee: Remember me, 0
Lord, in Thy kingdom.
Furthermore, these lines:
Be awe-stricken, 0 mortal, beholding the deifying Blood;
For It is a fire that consumeth the
unworthy. 
-374-
The Divine Body both deifieth and
nourisheth me.
It deifieth the spirit, and wondrously nourisheth the mind.
Then the Troparia:
Thou hast sweetened me with Thy
love, 0 Christ, and by Thy Divine zeal
hast Thou changed me. But do Thou
consume my sins with immaterial fire,
and vouchsafe me to be filled with
delight in Thee; that, leaping for joy, 0
Good One, I may magnify Thy two
comings.
Into the brilliant company of Thy
saints how shall I the unworthy enter?
For if I dare to enter into the bridechamber, my garment betrayeth me,
for it is not a wedding garment, and I
shall be bound and cast out by the
angels. Cleanse, 0 Lord, my soul of
pollution, and save me, as Thou art the
Lover of mankind. 
-375-
Then the Prayer:
0 Master, Lover of mankind, 0
Lord Jesus Christ my God, let not these
Holy Things be unto me for judgment,
through my being unworthy, but unto
the purification and sanctification of
soul and body, and as a pledge of the
life and kingdom to come. For it is
good for me to cleave unto God, to put
my hope of salvation in the Lord.
And again:
Of Thy Mystical Supper, 0 Son of
God, receive me today as a communicant; for I will not speak of the Mystery
to Thine enemies; nor will I give Thee
a kiss, as did Judas, but like the thief do
I confess Thee: Remember me, 0
Lord, in Thy kingdom. 
-376-
THE PRAYERS
AFfER HOLY COMMUNION
vVhen thou hast received the good
Communion of the life-giving Mystical
Gifts, give praise immediately, give thanks
greatly, and from the soul say fervently unto
God these things:
Glory to Thee, 0 God.
Glory to Thee, 0 God.
Glory to Thee, 0 God.
Then this Prayer of Thanksgiving:
I thank Thee, 0 Lord my God, that
Thou hast not rejected me, a sinner, but hast vouchsafed me to be a
communicant of Thy Holy Things. I
thank Thee that Thou hast vouchsafed
me, the unworthy, to partake of Thy
most pure and heavenly Gifts. But, 0 
-377-
Master, Lover of mankind, Who for our
sake didst die and didst rise again, and
didst bestow upon us these dread and
life-giving Mysteries for the well-being
and sanctification of our souls and
bodies, grant that these may be even
unto me for the healing of both soul
and body, for the averting of everything hostile, for the enlightenment of
the eyes of my heart, for the peace of
the powers of my soul, for faith
unashamed, for love unfeigned, for
the fullness of wisdom, for the keeping
of Thy commandments, for an
increase of Thy Divine grace, and for
the attainment of Thy kingdom; that
being preserved by them in Thy holiness, I may always remember Thy
grace, and no longer live for myself,
but for Thee our Master and Benefactor; and thus when I shall have departed this life in hope of life eternal, I 
-378-
may attain unto everlasting rest, where
the sound of them that keep festival is
unceasing, and the delight is endless of
them that behold the ineffable beauty
of Thy countenance. For Thou art the
true desire and the unutterable gladness of them that love Thee, 0 Christ
our God, and all creation doth hymn
Thee unto the ages. Amen.
Of Basil the Great, 2:
0 Master Christ God, King of the
ages, and Creator of all things, I
thank Thee for all the good things
which Thou hast bestowed upon me,
and for the Communion of Thy most
pure and life-giving Mysteries. I pray
Thee, therefore, 0 Good One and
Lover of Mankind: Keep me under
Thy protection and in the shadow of
Thy wings and grant me, even until my
last breath, to partake worthily, with a
pure conscience, of Thy Holy Things, 
-379-
unto the remission of sins and life eternal. For Thou art the Bread of Life,
the Source of holiness, the Giver of
good things; and unto Thee do we
send up glory, together with the Father
and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and
unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Verses of Metaphrastes, 3:
0 Thou who givest me willingly Thy
Flesh as food, Thou Who art Fire
that doth consume the unworthy, burn
me not, 0 my Creator; but, rather,
enter Thou into my members, into all
my joints, my reins, my heart. Burn up
the thorns of all my sins. Purify my
soul, sanctify my thoughts. Strengthen
my substance together with my bones.
Enlighten my simple five senses. Nail
down the whole of me with Thy fear.
Ever protect, preserve, and keep me
from every soul-corrupting deed and
word. Purify and cleanse, and adorn 
-380-
me; make me comely, give me understanding, and enlighten me. Show me
to be the dwelling-place of Thy Spirit
alone, and no longer the habitation of
sin; that from me as Thine abode
through the entry of Communion,
every evildoer, every passion, may flee
as from fire. As intercessors I offer
unto Thee all the saints, the commanders of the bodiless hosts, Thy
Forerunner, the wise apostles, and further, Thine undefiled pure Mother,
whose entreaties do Thou accept, 0
my compassionate' Christ, and make
Thy servant a child of light. For Thou
alone art our sanctification, 0 Good
One, and the radiance of our souls,
and unto Thee as God and Master, we
all send up glory, as is meet, every day.
Another Prayer:
0 Lord Jesus Christ our God, may
Thy holy Body be unto me for 
-381-
life eternal, and Thy precious Blood
for the remission of sins; and may this
Eucharist be unto me for joy, health,
and gladness. And at Thy dread
Second Coming vouchsafe me, a sinner, to stand at the right hand of Thy
glory, through the intercessions of Thy
most pure Mother and of all the saints.
Another Prayer,
to the Most Holy Theotokos:
0 most holy Lady Theotokos, light
of my darkened soul, my hope,
protection, refuge, consolation, my joy:
I thank thee that thou hast vouchsafed
me, who am unworthy, to be a partaker
of the most pure Body and precious
Blood of thy Son. 0 thou who gavest
birth to the True Light, do thou enlighten the spiritual eyes of my heart;
thou who gavest birth to the Source of
immortality, revive me who am dead in
sin; thou who art the lovingly-compas-
-382-
sionate Mother of the merciful God,
have mercy on me, and grant me compunction, and contrition in my heart,
and humility in my thoughts, and the
recall of my thoughts from captivity.
And vouchsafe me until my last breath
to receive without condemnation the
sanctification of the most pure
Mysteries, for the healing of both soul
and body; and grant me tears of repentance and confession, that I may hymn
and glorify thee all the days of my life,
for blessed and most glorious art thou
unto the ages. Amen.
Then: Now lettest Thou Thy servant
depart in peace, 0 Master, according
to Thy word; for mine eyes have seen
Thy salvation which Thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples, a
light of revelation for the Gentiles, and
the glory of Thy people Israel.
Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy Im-
-383-
mortal, have mercy on us. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
0 Most Holy Trinity, have mercy on
us. 0 Lord, blot out our sins. 0 Master, pardon our iniquities. 0 Holy
One, visit and heal our infirmities for
Thy name's sake.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Our Father, Who art in the heavens,
hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom
come, Thy will be done, on earth as it
is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread, and forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors; and lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from
the evil one. 
-384-
Troparion to SaintJohn Chrysostom,
Eighth Tone:
G
race shining forth from thy
mouth like a beacon hath illumined the universe, and disclosed to
the world treasures of uncovetousness,
and shown us the heights of humility;
but while instructing by thy words, 0
Father John Chrysostom, intercede
with the Word, Christ our God, to save
our souls.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Kontakion, Sixth Tone:
F
rom the heavens hast thou
received divine grace and by thy
lips thou dost teach all to worship the
One God in Trinity, 0 John Chrysostom, all-blessed righteous one.
Rightly do we acclaim thee, for thou
art a teacher revealing things divine.
Both now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen. 
-385-
0 protection of Christians that cannot be put to shame, 0 mediation unto the Creator unfailing, disdain not the suppliant voices of sinners; but be thou quick, 0 good one,
to help us who in faith cry unto thee;
hasten to intercession and speed thou
to make supplication, thou who dost
ever protect, 0 Theotokos, them that
honour thee.
But if it be the Liturgy of St. Basil, read the:
Troparion to Saint Basil the Great,
First Tone:
T
hy fame hath gone forth into all
the earth, which hath received thy
word. Thereby thou hast divinely
taught the Faith; thou hast made manifest the nature of created things; thou
hast made the moral life of men a royal
priesthood. 0 Basil our righteous
father, intercede with Christ God that
our souls be saved. 
-386-
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Kontakion, Fourth Tone:
T
hou didst prove to be an unshakable foundation of the Church,
giving to all mortals an inviolate lordship, and sealing it with thy doctrines,
0 righteous Basil, revealer of heavenly
things.
Both now... 0 protection of Christians .... (page 385 ).
But if it be the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts:
Troparion to Saint Gregory
the Dialogist, Fourth Tone:
T
hou who hast received of God
divine grace from on high, 0
glorious Gregory, and hast been fortified by His power, thou didst will to
walk according to the Gospel; wherefore, thou hast received of Christ the
reward of thy labours, 0 all-blessed
one. Entreat Him that He save our
souls. 
-387-
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit.
Kontakion, Third Tone:
T
hou hast shown thyself to be a
leader like unto the Chief Shepherd Christ, 0 Father Gregory, guiding flocks of monks into the heavenly
sheepfold, and from whence thou
didst teach the flock of Christ His commandments. And now thou dost
rejoice with them and dance in the
heavenly mansions.
Both now .... O protection of Christians .... (page 385).
Lord, have mercy. Twelve times.
Glory. Both now.
More honourable than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, who without
corruption gavest birth to God the
Word, the very Theotokos, thee do we
magnify.
And the Dismissal. 
-388-
HOW ONE SHOULD PRAY
IN CHURCH
Orthodox Christians have received from
the Holy Fathers and observe the following
practice throughout the world:
1. Entering the holy temple and making
the sign of the Cross upon oneself thrice, one
makes a bow with each, saying:
"Thou hast created me, 0 Lord, have
mercy on me." ·
"O God, be merciful to me a sinner."
"Countless times have I sinned, 0 Lord, forgive me.
2. Then, having bowed to the right and the
left, one stands in one's place and listens to the
psalms and prayers read in church, but one
does not say to oneself other prayers of one's
own choosing nor read them according to
books different from the church chanting, for
such things the holy Apostle Paul condemns as
having forsaken the assembly of the Church
(Hebrews 10:25). 
-389-
3. Prostrations and bows should not be
made according to one's inclination, but
according to the regulations of the holy apostles and holy fathers, namely: at the reading of
the Trisagion ("Holy God,"), "O come let us
worship," and the threefold "Alleluia," one
makes upon himself the sign of the Cross
thrice, concluding with bows; likewise also at
the reading: "Vouchsafe, 0 Lord," as well as at
the beginning of the Great Doxology ("Glory
to God in the highest,"), and after the words of
the priest: "Glory to Thee, 0 Christ God, our
hope." After each exclamation of the priest,
and also at the reading by the reader of: "More
honourable than the Cherubim," one makes
the sign of the Cross and a bow.
On weekdays prostrations are made at the
Liturgy:
a) at the beginning of the chanting of "It is
meet and right";
b) when the prayer "We praise Thee" is finished;
c) at the end of the prayer: "It is truly
meet," or its substitute megalynarion;
d) at the beginning of the prayer "Our
Father";
e) at the bringing forth of the Holy Gifts 
-390-
for Communion;
f) and at the words "Always, now and ever."
At Matins or Vigil, when "The Theotokos
and Mother of the Light let us magnify in
song" is exclaimed, we make a prostration.
4. On Sundays, and likewise from the day of
Holy Pascha until Vespers on the day of Pentecost
(i.e., the "Kneeling Service"), and also from the
day of the Nativity of Christ until Theophany, and
likewise on the day of Transfiguration and on
the Exaltation ( except before the Cross), the
Holy Apostles utterly forbid kneeling and prostrations, concerning which St. Basil the Great testified in a letter to the Blessed Amphilochius.
Thus also the First and Sixth Ecumenical
Councils established; for Sundays and other
feasts of the Lord serve as reminders of our
adoption by God, according to the word of the
Apostle: "Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son" (Gal.4:7); for it is not proper
for sons to make servile adoration.
5. Customarily, Orthodox Christians do
not kneel, heads upright, but at the words of
the priest ( or deacon): "Again and again, on
bended knee," and the rest, they bow the face
to the ground; the custom of kneeling at will,
folding the arms, and beating oneself on the 
-391-
breast comes from the Western heretics, and
in the Orthodox Church it is not allowed.
Orthodox Christians, in accordance with the
Church rule, make prostrations at the appointed times, bowing prone upon the ground and
again standing on the feet.
6. In church, whenever the people are
blessed with the Cross or the Gospel, with an
icon or the chalice, they all make the sign of
the Cross, bowing the head; but when blessed
with candles, or the hand(s), or censed,
Orthodox Christians ought not to make the
sing of the Cross, but only bow the head.
However, during the week of Holy Pascha
when the priest censes with the Cross in his
hand, then all make the sign of the Cross and
answer: "Truly He is risen!" In this way ought
we to distinguish between reverence toward
holy things and toward persons, although they
be of priestly rank.
7. When receiving a blessing from either a
priest or a bishop, a Christian kisses the right
hand of him who bestows the blessing, but
does not make the sign of the Cross before
doing so. It is not proper to kiss the left hand
of clergy, for this is a Jewish usage, but the
right hand with which the blessing is given. 
-392-
8. According to the teaching of the Holy
Fathers, the sign of the Cross should be made
in the following manner: the thumb and first
two fingers of the right hand are joined at
their tips and the other fingers folded across
the palm. We then touch the brow, the belly,
and the right and left shoulders, and make a
slight bow. Of those who sign themselves with
all five fingers, or who bow before finishing the
Cross, or simply wave their hand in the air or
before their breast, Chrysostom says: "The
demons rejoice at these mad gestures." On
the other hand, the sign of the Cross, properly
made with faith and reverence, terrifies the
demons, calms sinful passions, and calls down
divine grace.
RULES FOR BOWS AND
THE SIGN OF THE CROSS
The Sign of the Cross without Bows:
1. At the middle of the Six Psalms, at
Alleluia, thrice.
2. At the beginning of the Creed.
3. At the dismissal: "May Christ our true
God."
4. At the beginning of a reading from Holy
Scripture: Gospel, Epistle, or Parable (at
Vespers, Royal Hours). 
-393-
The Sign of the Cross
with Bows from the Waist:
1. When entering or leaving a church
thrice.
2. At each petition of the ecteniae.
3. At each exclamation of the priest offering
up glory to the Holy Trinity.
4. At the exclamations: "Take, eat"; "Drink of
it, all ofyou"; "Thine Own of Thine Own";
and "Holy Things are for the holy."
5. At the words: "More honourable."
6. At each of the words:: "Let us worship,"
"Worship," "We fall down."
7. During the words: "Alleluia," "Holy God,"
"O come let us worship," and after the
exclamation "Glory to Thee, 0 Christ
God," before the dismissal - thrice.
8. At the canon, at the first and ninth odes, at
the first refrain to the Lord, the Mother of
God, or the saint.
9. After each sticheron (at which time the
choir that has finished chanting makes the
sign of the Cross).
10. At the Litia, after each of the first three
petitions we sign ourselves and bow three
times; after the remaining two petitions we
sign ourselves and bow once. 
-394-
The Sign of the Cross with Prostrations:
1. During fasts, on entering and leaving the
church, thrice.
2. During fasts, after each refrain to the Song
of the Theotokos, "Thee do we magnify."
3. At the beginning of the hymn: "It is meet
and right to worship the Father."
4. After "We praise Thee."
5. After "It is truly meet," or its substitute
megalynarion.
6. At the exclamation: "And vouchsafe us, 0
Master."
7. At the bringing forth of the Holy Gifts, at
the words: "With fear of God," and the second time, at the words: "Always, now and
ever."
8. During the Great Fast, at Great Compline,
at the chanting of "O most holy Lady," at
each verse; at the chanting of "O Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice," and the rest, at
Great Lenten Vespers, three prostrations.
9. During fasts, at the prayer, "O Lord and
Master of my life."
10 During fasts, at the concluding chanting:
"Remember us, 0 Lord, when Thou
comest in Thy kingdom,"-always three
prostrations. 
-395-
Bows from the Waist
without the Sign of the Cross:
1. At the words: "Peace be unto all."
2. "The blessing of the Lord be upon you."
3. "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ."
4. "And may the mercies of our great God."
5. At the words of the deacon: "And unto the
ages of ages" (after "For holy art Thou, 0
our God").
The Sign of the Cross is not to be made:
1. During psalms.
2. Generally while chanting.
3. During Ecteniae by the choir that chants
the responses.
The making of the sign of the Cross and
bows should be done after the chanting is finished, and not during the closing words.
Prostrations are not allowed:
On Sundays; from the Nativity of Christ
through Theophany; from Pascha until Pentecost Sunday; on the day of Transfiguration;
and on the Exaltation of the Cross (except
three prostrations before the Cross).
Prostrations cease from the Entry at the
Vespers of a feast, until "Vouchsafe, 0 Lord,"
at Vespers on the day of the feast itself. 
-396-
THE ORDER FOR READING
CANONS AND AKATHISTS
WHEN ALONE
Before beginning any rule of prayer, and at
its completion, the following reverences are
made (prostrations or bows), which is called
The Sev~n-Bow Beginning.
1. 0 God, be merciful to me a sinner. Bow.
2. 0 God, cleanse me a sinner and have
mercy on me. Bow.
3. Thou hast created me, 0 Lord, have
mercy on me. Bow.
4. Countless times have I sinned, 0 Lord,
forgive me. Bow.
5. My most holy Lady Theotokos, save me a
sinner. Bow.
6. 0 Angel, my holy Guardian, protect me
from all evil. Bow.
7. Holy Apostle ( or Martyr, or Holy Father
N.), pray to God for me. Bow. 
-397-
Then: Through the prayers of our holy
fathers, 0 Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us. Amen.
Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee.
0 Heavenly King; Holy God (thrice); Glory,
Both now; 0 Most Holy Trinity; Lord, have
mercy (thrice); Glory, Both now; Our Father;
Lord, have mercy (twelve); Glory, Both now; 0
come let us worship (thrice); Psalm 50, Have
mercy on me, 0 God; I Believe; and the reading
of the canons and akathists.
The Canons and Akathists are read as follows:
A. If one canon or akathist is to be read, it
is read straight through.
B. If more than one canon is to be read,
the first Ode of the first canon is read. If the
refrain before the final or last two troparia is
"Glory ... Both now," the Glory is replaced by the
refrain of the canon, and the Both now is
replaced by "O most holy Theotokos, save us"
( this comes before a Theotokion, a troparion to
the Mother of God). Then the first Ode of the
second canon is read, beginning with the
refrain of the canon (the Eirmos being omitted since the Eirmos of the first canon only is
read or chanted), etc. Glory and Both now are 
-398-
used as refrains only before the last two
troparia ( or the last troparion) of the final
canon to be read. Then the third Ode of the
first canon, beginning with the Eirmos, etc.
After the third Ode: Lord, have mercy (3), Glory,
Both now, and the Sessional Hymn(s). When
there is more than one canon, the Kontakion
of the second is read (and any additional ones
are read) after the Sessional Hymns, and the
Glory ... Both now is read before the final two
verses, not after Lord, have mercy as given above.
Then Odes 4, 5, and 6 are read. After the
Sixth Ode: Lord, have mercy (3) Glory ... Both now,
and the Kontakion of the first canon. Then
Odes 7, 8, and 9 are read.
C. If an Akathist is read with the canon (s),
it is inserted after the Sixth Ode. All Kontakia
of the canon(s) are read after the Third Ode
in this case.
After the Ninth Ode:
It is truly meet ....
Trisagion through Our Father ....
Have mercy on us, 0 Lord, have mercy on
us ... and the rest of the Prayers before Sleep.
If no other prayers are to be read, the closing is as follows:
It is truly meet... 
-399-
The Prayer(s) following the canon(s).
Trisagion through Our Father ...
Lord, have mercy, thrice.
Glory ... Both now ...
More honourable than the Cherubim ....
Through the prayers of our holy fathers, 0
Lord Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us.
Amen.
Those who are preparing for Holy
Communion are obliged to read three Canons
and one Akathist the evening before. Usually
read are the Supplicatory Canons to the
Saviour and the Mother of God, and the
Canon to the Guardian Angel (in that order),
and either the Akathist to the Saviour or to the
Mother of God. Those who desire to carry out
this evening rule of prayer daily receive great
spiritual benefit from doing so. 
-400-
CONCERNING THE JESUS PRAYER
In the First Epistle to the Thessalonians the
Apostle Paul says: Pray without ceasing. How,
then, is one to pray unceasingly? By often
repeating the Jesus Prayer: "Lord Jesus Christ,
Son of God, have mercy on me." If one
becomes accustomed to this appeal, great consolation and the need to continually make this
petition will be felt within, and it will be carried on, as if of itself, within one.
Although in the beginning the enemy of
the human race will offer hindrances to this,
by causing great weariness, indolence, boredom, and over-powering sleep, having withstood all these with the help of God, one will
receive peace of soul, spiritual joy, a benevolent disposition towards people, tranquility of
thought, and gratitude toward God.
In the very name of Jesus Christ a great and
graceful power is inherent.
Many holy and righteous people advise
how one can often, almost without interruption, perform the Jesus Prayer.
Saint John Chrysostom says: "It is necessary
for everyone, whether eating, drinking, sitting,
serving, travelling, or doing anything, to
unceasingly cry: 'Lord Jesus Christ, Son of 
-401-
God, have mercy on me,' that the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, descending into the depths
of the heart, may subdue the pernicious serpent, and save and quicken the soul.
Saint Seraphim of Sarov: "Lord Jesus
Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me a sinner": let all thine attention and training be in
this. Walking, sitting, doing, and standing in
church before the divine service, coming in
and going out, keep this unceasingly on thy
lips and in thy heart. In calling in this manner
on the name of God thou wilt find peace, thou
wilt attain to purity of spirit and body, and the
Holy Spirit, the Origin of all good things, will
dwell in thee, and He will guide thee unto holiness, unto all piety and purity."
Bishop Theophanes the Recluse: "In order
to more conveniently become accustomed to
the remembrance of God, for this the fervent
Christian has a special means, namely, to
repeat unceasingly a brief prayer of two or
three words. Most often this is: 'Lord, have
mercy!' or 'Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy on
me a sinner.' If you have not yet heard of this,
then hear it now, and if you have not done it,
then begin to do it from this time.
"Those who have truly decided to serve the 
-402-
Lord God must train themselves in the remembrance of God and in unceasing prayer to
Jesus Christ, saying mentally: 'Lord Jesus
Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me a sinner.'
"Through such practice, by guarding oneself from distraction and by the preservation of
the peace of one's conscience, it is possible to
draw near to God and to be united with Him.
For, according to the words of Saint Isaac the
Syrian, 'Without unceasing prayer we cannot
draw near to God' (St. Seraphim of Sarov)."
Saint John of Kronstadt likewise frequently
counselled the doing of the Jesus Prayer. 