SELECTIONS FROM MATINS
The Six Psalms
Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace, good will among men.
Thrice.
O Lord, Thou shalt open my lips,
and my mouth shall declare Thy
praise. Twice.
PSALM 3
O Lord, why are they multiplied
. that afflict me? Many rise up
against me. Many say unto my soul:
There is no salvation for him in his
God. But Thou, O Lord, art my helper,
my glory, and the lifter up of my head.
I cried unto the Lord with my voice,
and He heard me out of His holy
mountain. I laid me down and slept; I
awoke, for the Lord will help me. I will
not be afraid of ten thousands of
people that set themselves against me
round about. Arise, O Lord, save me,
O my God, for Thou hast smitten all
who without cause are mine enemies;
the teeth of sinners hast Thou broken.
Salvation is of the Lord, and Thy
blessing is upon Thy people.
I laid me down and slept; I awoke,
for the Lord will help me.
PSALM 37
O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine
anger, nor chasten me in
Thy wrath. For Thine arrows are
fastened in me, and Thou hast laid Thy
hand heavily upon me. There is no
healing in my flesh in the face of Thy
wrath; and there is no peace in my
bones in the face of my sins. For mine
iniquities are risen higher than my
head; as a heavy burden have they
pressed heavily upon me. My bruises
are become noisome and corrupt in
the face of my folly. I have been
wretched and utterly bowed down
until the end; all the day long I went
with downcast face. For my loins are
filled with mockings, and there is no
healing in my flesh. I am afflicted and
humbled exceedingly, I have roared
from the groaning of my heart.
O Lord, before Thee is all my desire,
and my groaning is not hid from Thee.
My heart is troubled, my strength hath
failed me; and the light of mine eyes,
even this is not with me. My friends
and my neighbours drew nigh
over against me and stood, and my
nearest of kin stood afar off. And they
that sought after my soul used violence; and they that sought evils for me
spake vain things, and craftinesses all
r-75-
lhe day long did they meditate. But as
for me, like a deaf man I heard them
not, and was as a speechless man that
openeth not his mouth. And I became
as a man that heareth not, and that
hath in his mouth no reproofs. For in
Thee have I hoped, O Lord, Thou wilt
hearken unto me, O Lord my God.
For I said: Let never mine enemies
rejoice over me; yea, when my feet
were shaken, those men spake boastful
words against me. For I am ready for
scourges, and my sorrow is continually
before me. For I will declare mine
iniquity, and I will take heed
concerning my sin. But mine enemies
ln·e and are made stronger than I, and
they that hated me unjustly are
multiplied. They that render me evil
for good slandered me, because I pursued goodness. Forsake me not,
O Lord my God, depart not from me.
Be attentive unto my help, O Lord of
my salvation.
Forsake me not, O Lord my God,
depart not from me. Be attentive unto
my help, O Lord of my salvation.
PSALM 62
O God, my God, unto Thee I rise
early at dawn. My soul hath
thirsted for Thee; how often hath my
flesh longed after Thee in a land barren and untrodden and unwatered. So
in the sanctuary have I appeared
before Thee to see Thy power and Thy
glory, For Thy mercy is better than
lives; my lips shall praise Thee. So
shall I bless Thee in my life, and in Thy
name will I lift up my hands. As with
marrow and fatness let my soul be
filled, and with lips of rejoicing shall
my mouth praise Thee. If I remembered Thee on my bed, at the dawn I
meditated on Thee. For Thou art
become my helper; in the shelter of
Thy wings will I rejoice. My soul hath
cleaved after Thee, Thy right hand
hath been quick to help me. But as for
these, in vain have they sought after my
soul; they shall go into the nethermost
parts of the earth, they shall be surrendered unto the edge of the sword; portions for foxes shall they be. But the
ting shall be glad in God, everyone
shall be praised that sweareth by Him;
for the mouth of them is stopped that
speak unjust things.
At the dawn I meditated on Thee .
. For Thou art become my helper; in the
shelter of Thy wings will I rejoice. My
soul hath cleaved after Thee, Thy right
hand hath been quick to help me.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to
Thee, O God. Thrice.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
PSALM 87
O Lord God of my salvation, by day have I cried and by night before
Thee. Let my prayer come before 1: Thee, bow down Thine ear unto my i!supplication. For filled with evils is my
soul, and my life unto hades hath
drawn nigh. I am counted with them
that go down into the pit; I am become
as a man without help, free among the
dead, like the bodies of the slain that
sleep in the grave, whom Thou
rememberest no more, and they are
cut off from Thy hand. They laid me
in the lowest pit, in darkness and in the
shadow of death. Against me is Thine
anger made strong, and all Thy billows
hast Thou brought upon me. Thou
hast removed my friends afar from me;
they have made me an abomination
unto themselves. I have been delivered
up, and have not come forth; mine
eyes are grown weak from poverty.
I have cried unto Thee, O Lord, the
11t-hole day long; I have stretched out
my hands unto Thee. Nay, for the
dead wilt Thou work wonders?
Or shall physicians raise them up that
they may give thanks unto Thee? Nay,
shall any in the grave tell of Thy mercy,
and of Thy truth in that destruction?
~ay, shall Thy wonders be known in
that darkness, and Thy righteousness
in that land that is forgotten? But as
for me, unto Thee, O Lord, have I
cried; and in the morning shall my
prayer come before Thee. Wherefore,
O Lord, dost Thou cast off my soul and
turnest Thy face away from me?
A poor man am I, and in troubles from
my youth; yea, having been exalted, I
was humbled and brought to distress.
Thy furies have passed upon me, and
Thy terrors have sorely troubled me.
They came round about me like water, i all the day long they compassed me
about together. Thou hast removed
afar from me friend and neighbour,
and mine acquaintances because of my
misery.
O Lord God of my salvation, by
day have I cried and by night before
Thee. Let my prayer come before
Thee, bow down Thine ear unto my
supplication.
PSALM 102
B
less the Lord, O my soul, and all
that is within me bless His holy
name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all that He hath done for
thee, Who is gracious unto all thine
iniquities, Who healeth all thine
infirmities, Who redeemeth thy life
from corruption, Who crowneth thee
Y.ith mercy and compassion, Who fulfilleth thy desire with good things; thy
youth shall be renewed as the eagle's.
The Lord performeth deeds of mercy,
and executeth judgment for all them
mat are wronged. He hath made His
Y.--ays known unto Moses, unto the sons
oflsrael the things that He hath willed.
Compassionate and merciful is the
Lord, long-suffering and plenteous in
mercy; not unto the end will He be
angered, neither unto eternity will He
be wroth. Not according to our iniquities hath He dealt with us, neither
according to our sins hath He rewarded us. For according to the height of
heaven from the earth, the Lord hath
made His mercy to prevail over them
that fear Him. As far as the east is from
the west, so far hath He removed our
iniquities from us. Like as a father
hath compassion upon his sons, so
hath the Lord had compassion upon
them that fear Him; for He knoweth
whereof we are made, He hath remembered that we are dust. As for man, his
days are as the grass; as a flower of the
field, so shall he blossom forth. For
when the wind is passed over it, then it
shall be gone, and no longer will it
know the place thereof. But the mercy
of the Lord is from eternity, even unto
eternity, upon them that fear Him.
And His righteousness is upon sons of
sons, upon them that keep His testament and remember His commandments to do them. The Lord in heaven hath prepared His throne, and His
kingdom ruleth over all. Bless the
Lord, all ye His angels, mighty in
strength, that perform His word, to
hear the voice of His words. Bless the
Lord, all ye His hosts, His ministers
that do His will. Bless the Lord, all ye
His works, in every place of His dominion. Bless the Lord, O my soul.
In every place of His dominion,
bless the Lord, O my soul.
PSALM 142
O Lord, hear my prayer, give ear
unto my supplication in Thy
rruth; hearken unto me in Thy
righteousness. And enter not into
judgment with Thy servant, for in Thy
sight shall no man
O
living be justified.
For the enemy hath persecuted my
soul; he hath humbled my life down to
the earth. He hath sat me in darkness
as those that have been long dead, and
my spirit within me is become
despondent; within me my heart is
troubled. I remembered days of old, I
meditated on all Thy works, I pondered on the creations of Thy hands.
I stretched forth my hands unto Thee;
my soul thirsteth after Thee like a
waterless land. Quickly hear me, O Lord, my spirit hath fainted away.
Turn not Thy face away from me, lest I
be like unto them that go down into
the pit. Cause me to hear Thy mercy
in the morning; for in Thee have I put
my hope. Cause me to know, O Lord,
the way wherein I should walk; for
unto Thee have I lifted up my soul.
Rescue me from mine enemies, O Lord; unto Thee have I fled for refuge.
Teach me to do Thy will, for Thou art
my God. Thy good Spirit shall lead me
in the land of uprightness; for Thy
name's sake, O Lord, shalt Thou
quicken me. In Thy righteousness
shalt Thou bring my soul out of afflic-
tion, and in Thy mercy shalt Thou
utterly destroy mine enemies. And
Thou shalt cut off all them that afflict
my soul, for I am Thy servant
Hearken unto me, O Lord, in Thy
righteousness, and enter not into judgment with Thy servant. Twice.
Thy good Spirit shall lead me in the
land of uprightness.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to
Thee, O God. Thrice.
After the Great Ectenia:
God is the Lord and hath appeared
unto us. Blessed is he that cometh in
the name of the Lord.
Then are sung the Troparia and the Theotokion as appointed.
The Polyeleos:
P
raise ye the name of the Lord; O ye servants, praise the Lord.
Alleluia, thrice.
Blessed is the Lord out of Sion, Who
dwelleth injerusalem. Alleluia, thrice.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for He
is good; for His mercy endureth for
ever. Alleluia, thrice.
O give thanks unto .the God of
heaven; for His mercy endureth for
ever. Alleluia, thrice.
Troparia of the Resurrection,
Fifth Tone:
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me
Thy statutes.
The assembly of Angels was amazed,
beholding Thee numbered among the
dead; yet, O Saviour, destroying the
stronghold of death, and with Thyself
raising up Adam, and freeing all from
hades.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me
Thy statutes.
Why mingle ye myrrh with tears of
pity, O ye women disciples? Thus the
radiant angel within the tomb
addressed the myrrh-bearing women;
behold the tomb and understand, for
the Saviour is risen from the tomb.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me
Thy statutes.
Very early the myrrh-bearing
.. -omen hastened unto Thy tomb,
lamenting, but the angel stood before
lhem and said: The time for lamentation is past, weep not, but tell of the
I
Resurrection to the apostles.
1 Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me
1 Thy statutes.
The myrrh-bearing women, with
myrrh came to Thy tomb, O Saviour,
bewailing, but the angel addressed
them, saying: Why number ye the
living among the dead, for as God He
is risen from the tomb.
Glory to the Father, and to the
Son,and to the Holy Spirit:
Let us worship the Father, and His
Son, and the Holy Spirit, the Holy
Trinity, one in essence, crying with the
Seraphim: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou,
O Lord.
Both now and ever, and unto the
ages of ages. Amen.
In bringing forth the Giver of Life,
thou hast delivered Adam from sin, O Virgin, and hast brought joy to Eve
instead of sorrow; and those fallen
from life hath thereunto been
restored, by Him Who of thee was
incarnate, God and Man.
Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Glory to
Thee, O God. Thrice:
The Hymns of Ascents,
Fourth Tone, First Antiphon:
From my youth do many passions
war against me; but do Thou Thyself
defend and save me, O my Saviour.
Ye haters of Sion, shall be shamed
by the Lord; for like grass, by the fire
shall ye be withered.
Glory to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now
and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
In the Holy Spirit, every soul is
quickened, and through cleansing is
exalted and made radiant by the Triple
Unity in a hidden sacred manner.
The Resurrection Song
after the Gospel:
Having beheld the Resurrection of
Christ, let us worship the holy Lord
Jesus, the only sinless One. We worship
Thy Cross, O Christ, and Thy holy
Resurrection we hymn and glorify.
For Thou art our God, and we know
none other beside Thee, we call upon
Thy name. O come, all ye faithful, let
us worship Christ's holy Resurrection,
for behold, through the Cross joy
hath come to all the world. Ever
blessing the Lord, we hymn His
Resurrection; for, having endured crucifixion, He hath destroyed death by
death.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit.
Through the prayers of the Apostles,
O Merciful One, blot out the multitude of our transgressions.
Both now and ever, and unto the
ages of ages. Amen.
Through the prayers of the Theotokos, O Merciful One, blot out the
multitude of our transgressions.
Have mercy on me, O God, accord-
ing to Thy great mercy; and according
to the multitude of Thy compassions,
blot out my transgression.
Jesus having risen from the grave, as
He foretold, hath given us life eternal,
and great mercy.
Before the Ninth Ode of the Canon,
the Song of the Most Holy Theotokos:
My soul doth magnify the Lord, and
my spirit hath rejoiced in God my
Saviour.
Refrain: More honourable than the
Cherubim and beyond compare more
glorious than the Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the
Word, the very Theo_tokos, thee do we
magnify.
For He hath looked upon the lowliness of His handmaiden; for behold,
from henceforth all generations shall
call me blessed. Refrain.
For the Mighty One hath done
great things to me, and holy is His
name; and His mercy is on them that
fear Him unto generation and generation. Refrain.
He hath showed strength with His
arm, He hath scattered the proud in
the imagination of their heart. Refrain.
He hath put down the mighty from
their seat, and exalted them of low
degree; He hath filled the hungry with
good things, and the rich He hath sent
empty away. Refrain.
He hath holpen His servant Israel in
remembrance of His mercy, as He
spake to our fathers, to Abraham and
his seed for ever. Refrain.
Theotokion:
{Sung on Sundays before the Doxology]
Most blessed art thou, O Virgin
Theotokos, for through Him Who
became incarnate of thee is hades led
captive, Adam recalled, the curse
annulled, Eve set free, death slain, and
we are given life. Wherefore, we cry
aloud in praise: Blessed art Thou, O Christ God, Who hast been thus wellpleased, glory to Thee.
The Great Doxology:
G
ory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace, good will among
men. We praise Thee, we bless Thee,
we worship Thee, we glorify Thee, we
give thanks to Thee for Thy great
glory. O Lord, Heavenly King, God the
Father Almighty; O Lord, the Onlybegotten Son,Jesus Christ; and O Holy
Spirit. O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son
of the Father, that takest away the sin
of the world, have mercy on us;
Thou that takest away the sins of the
world, receive our prayer; Thou that
sittest at the right hand of the Father,
have mercy on us. For Thou only art
holy, Thou only art the Lord, Jesus
Christ, to the glory of God the Father.
Amen.
Every day will I bless Thee, and I will
praise Thy name for ever, yea, for ever
and ever.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this
day without sin. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and
praised and glorified is Thy name unto
the ages. Amen.
Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us,
according as we have hoped in Thee.
Blessed art Thou, O Lord, teach me 1Thy statutes. Thrice.
Lord, Thou hast been our refuge in
generation and generation. I said: O Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul,
for I have sinned against Thee. O Lord, unto Thee have I fled for refuge,
teach me to do Thy will, for Thou art
my God; for in Thee is the fountain of
life, in Thy light shall we see light. O
continue Thy mercy unto them that
blow Thee.
Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy
Immortal, have mercy on us. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now
and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.
Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy
Immortal, have mercy on us.
Immediately after the Doxology:
Troparia of the Resurrection:
[Tones 1, 3, 5, and 7]
Today is salvation come unto the
world; let us sing to Him Who arose
from the tomb, and- is the Author of
our life. For having destroyed death by
death, He hath given us the victory and
great mercy.
[Tones 2, 4, 6, and 8]
Having risen from the tomb, and
having burst the bonds of hades, Thou
hast destroyed the sentence of death,
O Lord, delivering all from the snares
of the enemy. Manifesting Thyself to
Thine Apostles, Thou didst send them
forth to preach; and through them
hast granted Thy peace to the world, O Thou Who alone art plenteous in
mercy.