PASSION WEEK TROPARIA
HOLY AND GREAT MONDAY
At Matins:
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Behold, the
Bridegroom cometh at midnight, and
blessed is that servant whom He shall
find watching; but unworthy is he
whom He shall find heedless. Beware,
therefore, O my soul, lest thou be
weighed down with sleep; lest thou be
given up to death, and be shut out
from the kingdom. But rouse thyself
and cry: Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, O God; through the Theotokos, have
mercy on us. Thrice.
Kontakion, Eighth Tone:
Jacob lamented the loss of Joseph, but
that noble one was seated in a chariot
and honoured as a king; for by not
being enslaved then to the pleasures of
the Egyptian woman, he was glorified
by Him that beholdeth the hearts of
men, and that bestoweth an incorruptible crown.
HOLY AND GREAT TUESDAY
At Matins:
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Behold, the
Bridegroom cometh... [See Monday,
above].
Kontakion, Second Tone:
Having realized the hour of the end, O my soul, and having feared at the cutting down of the fig tree, labour with
the talent that was O given thee, O hapless one, and be watchful and cry: Let
us not remain outside the bridal-chamber of Christ.
HOLY AND GREAT WEDNESDAY
At Matins:
Troparion, Eighth Tone: Behold, the
Bridegroom cometh ... [See Monday].
Kontakion, Second Tone: Having
transgressed more than the harlot, O Good One, I have in no wise brought
forth streams of tears for Thee; but in
silence I supplicate Thee and fall down
before Thee, kissing Thine immaculate feet with love, so that, as Master
that Thou art, Thou mayest grant me
the forgiveness of debts, as I cry to
Thee, O Saviour: From the mire of my
deeds do Thou deliver me.
HOLY AND GREAT THURSDAY
At Matins:
Troparion, Eighth Tone: When the
glorious disciples were enlightened at
the washing of the feet, then Judas the
ungodly one was stricken and darkened with the love of silver. And unto
the lawless judges did he deliver Thee,
the righteous Judge. Behold, O lover
of money, him that for the sake thereof did hang himself; flee from that
insatiable soul that dared such things
against the Master. O Thou Who art
good unto all, Lord, glory be to Thee.
Kontakion, Second Tone: Taking the
bread into his hands, the betrayer
stretcheth them forth secretly and
receiveth the price of Him that, with
His Own hands, fashioned, man. And
Judas, the servant and deceiver,
remained incorrigible.
HOLY AND GREAT FRIDAY
Troparion, Eighth Tone: When the
glorious disciples ... [See Thursday].
Kontakion, Eighth Tone: Come, let us
all praise Him Who was crucified for
us, for Mary beheld Him on the Tree,
and said: Though Thou endurest the
Cross, Thou art my Son and my God.
HOLY AND GREAT SATURDAY
At Vespers and Saturday Matins:
Troparia, Second Tone: The noble
Joseph, having taken Thy most pure
Body down from the Tree and
wrapped It in pure linen and covered
It with spices, laid It in a new tomb.
When Thou didst descend unto
death, O Life Immortal, then didst
Thou slay hades with the lightning of
Thy divinity. And when Thou didst
also raise the dead out of the nethermost depths, all the Hosts of the heavens cried out: O Life-giver, Christ our
God, glory be to Thee.
Unto the Myrrh-bearing Women did
the angel cry out as he stood by the
grave: Myrrh is meet for the dead, but
Christ hath proved a stranger to corruption.
Kontakion, Second Tone: He that shut
up the abyss is seen as one dead, and
like a mortal, the Immortal One is
wrapped in linen and myrrh, and
placed in a grave. And women came to
anoint Him, weeping bitterly and crying out: This is the most blessed
Sabbath day wherein Christ, having
slept, shall arise on the third day.
,.
PAS CHA
PROCESSIONAL HYMN
Sixth (Sticheron) Tone:
Thy Resurrection, O Christ Saviour,
the angels hymn in the heavens;
vouchsafe also us on earth with pure
hearts to glorify Thee.