PRAYERS BEFORE SLEEP
In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
0 Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, for
the sake of the prayers of Thy most
pure Mother, of our holy and Godbearing fathers and all the saints, have
mercy on us. Amen.
Glory to Thee, our God, glory to
Thee.
0 Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit
of Truth, Who art everywhere present
and fillest all things; Treasury of good
dungs and Giver of life: Come and
ch, .. eU in us, and cleanse us of all impurity, and save our souls, 0 Good One.
Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy
Immortal, have mercy on us. Thrice. 
-40-
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
0 Most Holy Trinity, have mercy on
us. 0 Lord, blot out our sins. 0
Master, pardon our iniquities. 0 Holy
One, visit and heal our infirmities for
Thy name's sake.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Our Father, Who art in the heavens,
hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom
come, Thy will be done, on earth as it
is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread, and forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors; and lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from
the evil one.
Troparia:
Have mercy on us, 0 Lord, have 
-41-
mercy on us; for at a loss for any
defence, this prayer do we sinners
offer unto Thee as Master: have mercy
on us.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit.
Lord, have mercy on us; for we have
hoped in Thee, be not angry with us
greatly, neither remember our iniquities; but look upon us now as Thou art
compassionate, and deliver us from
our enemies, for Thou art our God,
and we, Thy people; all are the works
of the Thy hands, and we call upon
Thy name.
Both now and ever, and unto the
ages of ages. Amen.
The door of compassion open unto
us, 0 blessed Theotokos, for, hoping
in thee, let us not perish; through thee
may we be delivered from adversities,
for thou art the salvation of the 
-42-
Christian race.
Lord, have mercy. Twelve times.
Prayer I, of St. Macarius the Great:
0 Eternal God and King of all creation, Who hast vouchsafed me to
arrive at this hour, forgive me the sins
that I have committed this day in deed,
word, and thought; and cleanse, 0
Lord, my lowly soul of all impurity of
flesh and spirit, and grant me, 0 Lord,
to pass the sleep of this night in peace;
that, rising from my lowly bed, I may
please Thy most holy name all the days
of my life, and thwart the enemies,
fleshly and bodiless, that war against
me. And deliver me, 0 Lord, from vain
thoughts and evil desires which defile
me. For Thine is the kingdom, and
the power, and the glory: of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen. 
-43-
Prayer II, of Saint Antiochus:
0 Ruler of all, Word of the Father,
0 Jesus Christ, Thou Who art
perfect: For the sake of the plenitude
of Thy mercy, never depart from me,
but always remain in me Thy servant.
0 Jesus, Good Shepherd of Thy sheep,
deliver me not over to the sedition of
the serpent, and leave me not to the
will of Satan, for the seed of corruption
is in me. But do Thou, 0 Lord,
worshipful God, holy King, Jesus
: Christ, as I sleep, guard me by the
Unwaning Light, Thy Holy Spirit, by
\\'horn Thou didst sanctify Thy disciples. 0 Lord, grant me, Thine unworthy servant, Thy salvation upon my
bed. Enlighten my ·mind with the light
of understanding of Thy Holy Gospel;
my soul, with the love of Thy Cross; my
heart, with the purity of Thy word; my
body, with Thy passionless Passion. 
-44-
Keep my thought in Thy humility, and
raise me up at the proper time for Thy
glorification. For most glorified art
Thou together with Thine unoriginate
Father, and the Most-holy Spirit, unto
the ages. Amen.
Prayer III, to the Holy Spirit:
0 Lord, Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit of Truth, show compassion and have mercy on me Thy sinful servant, and loose me from mine
unworthiness, and forgive all wherein I
have sinned against Thee today as a
man, and not only as a man, but even
worse than a beast, my sins voluntary·
and involuntary, known and unknown,
whether from youth, and from evil suggestion, or whether from brazenness
and despondency. If I have sworn by
Thy name, or blasphemed it in my
thought; or reproached anyone, or
slandered anyone in mine anger, or 
-45-
grieved anyone, or have become angry
about anything; or have lied, or slept
needlessly, or if a beggar hath come to
me and I disdained him; or if I have
grieved my brother, or have quarreled,
or have condemned anyone; or if I
have been boastful, or prideful, or
angry; if, as I stood at prayer, my mind
hath been distracted by the wiles of
this world, or by thoughts of depravity;
if I have over-eaten, or have drunk
excessively, or laughed frivolously; if I
have thought evil, or seen the beauty
of another and been wounded thereby
in my heart; if I have said improper
things, or derided my brother's sin
when mine own sins are countless; if I
have been neglectful of prayer, or have
done some other wrong that I do not
remember, for all of this and more
than this have I done: have mercy, 0
Master my Creator, on me Thy down-
-46-
cast and unworthy servant, and loose
me, and remit, and forgive me, for
Thou art good and the Lover of
mankind, so that, lustful, sinful, and
wretched as I am, I may lie down and
sleep and rest in peace. And I shall
worship, and hymn, and glorify Thy
most honourable name, together with
the Father and His Only-begotten Son,
now and ever, and unto the ages. Amen.
Prayer W, of St. Macarius the Great:
What shall I offer Thee, or what
shall I give Thee, 0 greatly-gifted,
immortal King, 0 compassionate Lord
Who lovest mankind? For though· I
have been slothful in pleasing Thee,
and have done nothing good, Thou
hast led me to the close of this day that
is past, establishing the conversion and
salvation of my soul. Be merciful to me
a sinner, bereft of every good deed,
raise up my fallen soul which hath 
-47-
become defiled by countless sins, and
take away from me every evil thought
of this visible life. Forgive my sins, 0
Only Sinless One, in which I have
sinned against Thee this day, known or
unknown, in word, and deed, and
thought, and in all my senses. Do
Thou Thyself protect and guard me
from every opposing circumstance, by
Thy Divine authority and power and
inexpressible love for mankind. Blot
out, 0 God, blot out the multitude of
my sins. Be pleased, 0 Lord, to deliver me from the net of the evil one, and
save my passionate soul, and overshadow me with the light of Thy countenance when Thol! shalt come in glory;
and cause me, uncondemned now, to
sleep a dreamless sleep, and keep Thy
servant untroubled by thoughts, and
drive away from me all satanic deeds;
and enlighten for me the eyes of my 
-48-
heart with understanding, lest I sleep
unto death. And send me an angel of
peace, a guardian and guide ofmy soul
and body, that he may deliver me from
mine enemies; that, rising from my
bed, I may offer Thee prayers of thanksgiving. Yea, 0 Lord, hearken unto me,
Thy sinful and wretched servant, in
confession and conscience; grant me,
when I arise, to be instructed by Thy
sayings; and through Thine angels
cause demonic despondency to be
driven far from me: that I may bless
Thy holy name, and glorify and extol
the most pure Theotokos Mary, whom
Thou hast given to us sinners as a
protectress, and accept her who
prayeth for us. For I know that she
exemplifieth Thy love for mankind
and prayeth for us without ceasing.
Through her protection, and the sign
of the precious Cross, and for the sake 
-49-
of all Thy saints, preserve my wretched
soul, 0 Jesus Christ our God: for holy
art Thou, and most glorious for ever.
Amen.
PrayerV:
0 Lord our God, as Thou art good
and the Lover of mankind, forgive me wherein I have sinned today in
vmrd, deed, and thought. Grant me
peaceful and undisturbed sleep; send
Thy guardian angel to protect and
keep me from all evil. For Thou art
lhe Guardian of our souls and bodies,
and unto Thee do we send up glory: to
lhe Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto
lhe ages of ages. Ai?en.
Prayer VI:
0 Lord our God, in Whom we
believe and Whose name we
invoke above every name, grant us, as
we go to sleep, relaxation of soul and 
-50-
body, and keep us from all dreams, and
dark pleasures; stop the onslaught of the
passions and quench the burnings that
arise in the flesh. Grant us to live chastely in deed and word, that we may obtain
a virtuous life, and not fall away from
Thy promised blessings; for blessed art
Thou for ever. Amen.
Prayer VII, of St.John Chrysostom,
according to the number of hours of
day and night:
0 Lord, deprive me not of Thy
heavenly good things. 0 Lord,
deliver me from the eternal torments.
0 Lord, if I have sinned in mind or
thought, in word or deed, forgive me.
0 Lord, deliver me from all ignorance,
forgetfulness, faintheartedness, and
stony insensibility. 0 Lord, deliver me
from every temptation. 0 Lord,
enlighten my heart which evil desire
hath darkened. 0 Lord, as a man I 
-51-
have sinned, but do Thou, as the compassionate God, have mercy on me,
seeing the infirmity of my soul. 0
Lord, send Thy grace to my help, that
I may glorify Thy holy name. 0 Lord
Jesus Christ, write me Thy servant in
the Book of Life, and grant me a good
end. 0 Lord my God, even though I
have done nothing good in Thy sight,
yet grant me by Thy grace to make a
good beginning. 0 Lord, sprinkle into
my heart the dew of Thy grace. 0
Lord of heaven and earth, remember
me Thy sinful servant, shameful and
unclean, in Thy kingdom. Amen.
0 Lord, accept me in penitence. 0
Lord, forsake me p.ot. 0 Lord, lead
me not into temptation. 0 Lord, grant
me good thoughts. 0 Lord, grant me
tears, and remembrance of death, and
compunction. 0 Lord, grant me the
thought of confessing my sins. 
-52-
0 Lord, grant me humility, chastity,
and obedience. 0 Lord, grant me
patience, courage, and meekness. 0
Lord, implant in me the root of good,
Thy fear in my heart. 0 Lord, vouchsafe me to love Thee with all my soul
and thoughts, and in all things to do
Thy will. 0 Lord, protect me from evil
men, and demons, and passions, and
from every other unseemly thing. 0
Lord, Thou knowest that Thou doest
as Thou wilt: Thy will be done also in
me a sinner; for blessed art Thou unto
the ages. Amen.
Prayer VIII,
to our Lord Jesus Christ:
0 Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God,
for the sake of Thy most honourable Mother, and Thy bodiless
angels, Thy Prophet and Forerunner
and Baptist, the God-inspired apostles,
the radiant and victorious martyrs, the 
-53-
holy and God-bearing fathers, and
through the intercessions of all the
saints, deliver me from the besetting
presence of the demons. Yea, my Lord
and Creator, Who desirest not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he be
converted and live, grant conversion
also to me, wretched and unworthy;
rescue me from the mouth of the
pernicious serpent, who is yawning to
devour me and take me down to hades
alive. Yea, my Lord, my Comfort, Who
for my miserable sake wast clothed in
corruptible flesh, draw me out of misery, and grant comfort to my miserable
soul. Implant in my heart to fulfill
Thy commandments, and to forsake
e,il deeds, and to obtain Thy blessings;
for in Thee, 0 Lord, have I hoped,
save me. 
-54-
Prayer IX,
to the Most Holy Theotokos:
0 good Mother of the Good King,
most pure and blessed Theotokos Mary, do thou pour out the
mercy of thy Son and our God upon
my passionate soul, and by thine intercessions guide me unto good works,
that I may pass the remaining time of
my life without blemish, and attain paradise through thee, 0 Virgin Theotokos, who alone art pure and blessed.
Prayer :X, to the Holy Guardian Angel:
0 Angel of Christ, my holy guardian and protector of my soul and
body, forgive me all wherein I have
sinned this day, and deliver me from
all opposing evil of mine enemy, lest I
anger my God by any sin. Pray for me,
a sinful and unworthy servant, that
thou mayest show me forth worthy of
the kindness and mercy of the All-holy 
-55-
Trinity, and of the Mother of my Lord
.Jesus Christ, and of all the saints. Amen.
Kontakion to the Theotokos:
To thee, the Champion Leader, we
thy servants dedicate a feast of victory
and of thanksgiving as ones rescued
out of sufferings, 0 Theotokos; but as
lhou art one with might which is invincible, from all dangers that can be do
lhou deliver us, that we may cry to
thee: Rejoice, thou Bride Unwedded!
Most glorious, Ever-Virgin, Mother
of Christ God, present our prayer to
lhy Son and our God, that through
thee He may save our souls.
All my hope I place in thee, 0
Mother of God: k,eep me under thy
protection.
0 Virgin Theotokos, disdain not me
a sinner, needing thy help and thy protection, and have mercy on me, for my
soul hath hoped in thee. 
-56-
My hope is the Father, my refuge is
the Son, my protection is the Holy
Spirit: 0 Holy Trinity, glory to Thee.
It is truly meet to bless thee, the
Theotokos, ever-blessed and most
blameless, and Mother of our God.
More honourable than the Cherubim,
and beyond compare more glorious
than the Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word,
the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
0 Lord, bless. And the dismissal:
0 Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, for
the sake of the prayers of Thy most
pure Mother, our holy and God-bearing fathers, and all the saints, have
mercy on us. Amen. 
-57-
Prayer of Saint John Damascene,
which is to be said while pointing
at thy bed:
0 Master, Lover of mankind, is
this bed to be my coffin, or wilt
Thou enlighten my wretched soul
with another day? Behold, the coffin
lieth before me; behold, death confronteth me. I fear, 0 Lord, Thy
judgment and the endless torments,
~·et I cease not to do evil. My Lord
God, I continually anger Thee, and
Thy most pure Mother, and all the
Heavenly Hosts, and my holy
guardian angel. I know, 0 Lord, that
I am unworthy of Thy love for
mankind, but am worthy of every
condemnation and torment. But, 0
Lord, whether I will it or not, save
me. For to save a righteous man is no
great thing, and to have mercy on the
pure is nothing wonderful, for they
are worthy of Thy mercy. But on me, 
-58-
a sinner, show the wonder of Thy
mercy; in this reveal Thy love for
mankind, lest my wickedness prevail
over Thine ineffable goodness and
merciful kindness; and order my life
as Thou wilt.
And when about to lie down in bed,
say this:
Enlighten mine eyes, 0 Christ
God, lest at any time I sleep unto
death, lest at any time mine enemy
say: I have prevailed against him.
Glory to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Be my soul's helper, 0 God, for I
pass through the midst of many
snares; deliver me out of them, and
save me, 0 Good One, for Thou art
the Lover of mankind.
Both now and ever, and unto the
ages of ages. Amen.
The most glorious Mother of God, 
-59-
more holy than the holy angels, let us
hymn unceasingly with our hearts
and mouths, confessing her to be the
Theotokos, for truly she gaveth birth
to God incarnate for us, and prayeth
unceasingly for our souls.
Then kiss thy Cross, and make the
sign of the Cross [with the Cross] from the
head to the foot of the bed, and likewise
from side to side, while saying the Prayer
to the Venerable Cross:
T et God arise and let His enemies be
L scattered, and let them that hate
Him flee from before His face. As
smoke vanisheth, so let them vanish;
as wax melteth before the fire, so let
the demons perish from the presence
of them that love ·God and who sign
themselves with the sign of the Cross
and say in gladness: Rejoice, most venerable and life-giving Cross of the
Lord, for Thou drivest away the 
-60-
demons by the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ Who was crucified on
thee, Who went down to hades and
trampled on the power of the devil,
and gave us thee, His venerable Cross,
for the driving away of every adversary. 0 most venerable and life-giving
Cross of the Lord, help me together
with the holy Lady Virgin Theotokos,
and with all the saints, unto the ages.
Amen.
Or:
Compass me about, 0 Lord, with
the power of Thy precious and life-giving Cross and preserve me from every
evil.
Then, instead of [asking] forgiveness [ of anyone else]:
Remit, pardon, forgive, 0 God,
our offences, both voluntary and
involuntary, in word and deed, in
knowledge and ignorance, by day
and by night, in mind and thought; 
-61-
forgive us all things, for Thou art
good and the Lover of mankind.
Prayer:
0 Lord, Lover of mankind, forgive
them that hate and wrong us.
Do good to them that do good. Grant
our brethren and kindred their saving
petitions and life eternal; visit the
infirm and grant them healing.
Guide those at sea. Journey with
them that travel. Help Orthodox
Christians to struggle. To them that
serve and are kind to us grant remission of sins. On them that have
charged us, the unworthy, to pray for
them, have mercy according to Thy
great mercy. Remember, 0 Lord, our
fathers and brethren departed before
us, and grant them rest where the
light of Thy countenance shall visit
them. Remember, 0 Lord, our
brethren in captivity, and deliver 
-62-
them from every misfortune.
Remember, 0 Lord, those that bear
fruit and do good works in Thy holy
churches, and grant them their saving
petitions and life eternal. Remember
also, 0 Lord, us Thy lowly and sinful
and unworthy servants, and enlighten
our minds with the light of Thy knowledge, and guide us in the way of Thy
commandments; through the intercessions of our most pure Lady, the
Theotokos and Ever-Virgin Mary, and
of all Thy saints, for blessed art Thou
unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Daily Confession of Sins:
I confess to Thee, my Lord God
and Creator, in one Holy Trinity
glorified and worshipped, to the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, all my
sins which I have committed in all the
days of my life, and at every hour, at
the present time and in the past, day 
-63-
and night, by deed, word, thought,
gluttony, drunkenness, secret eating,
idle talking, despondency, indolence,
contradiction, disobedience, slandering, condemning, negligence, selflove, acquisitiveness, extortion, lying,
dishonesty, mercenariness, jealousy,
envy, anger, remembrance of wrongs,
hatred, bribery; and by all my senses:
sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch;
and by the rest of my sins, of the soul
together with the bodily, through
which I have angered Thee, my God
and Creator, and dealt unjustly with
my neighbour. Sorrowing for these, I
stand guilty before Thee, my God,
but I have the will to repent. Only
help me, 0 Lord my God, with tears I
humbly entreat Thee. Forgive my
past sins through Thy compassion,
and absolve from all these which I
have said in Thy presence, for Thou
art good and the Lover of mankind. 
-64-
When giving thyself up to sleep,
say:
Into Thy hands, 0 Lord Jesus
Christ my God, I commit my spirit.
Do Thou bless me, do Thou have
mercy on me, and grant me life eternal. Amen. 
-65-