MORNING PRAYERS
Having risen from sl,eep, before any other action,
stand reverently, considering thyself to be in the presence of the All-seeing God, and, having made the
sign of the Cross, say:
In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.
Then pause a moment, until all thy senses are
calmed and thy thoughts forsake all things earthly;
and then make three bows, saying:
The Prayer of the Publican:
0 God, be merciful to me a sinner.
The Beginning Prayer:
0 Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, for
the sake of the prayers of Thy most 
-8-
pure Mother and all the saints, have
mercy on us. Amen.
Glory to Thee, our God, glory to
Thee.
0 Heavenly King, Comforter, Spirit
of Truth, Who art everywhere present
and fillest all things, Treasury of good
things and Giver of life: Come and
dwell in us, and cleanse us of all impurity, and save our souls, 0 Good One.
Holy God, Holy Mighty, Holy
Immortal, have mercy on us. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
0 Most Holy Trinity, have mercy on
us. 0 Lord, blot out our sins. 0
Master, pardon our iniquities. 0 Holy
One, visit and heal our infirmities for
Thy name's sake.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son, 
-9-
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Our Father, Who art in the heavens,
hallowed be Thy name. Thy kingdom
come, Thy will be done, on earth as it
is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread, and forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors; and lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from
the evil one.
Troparia to the Holy Trinity:
Having risen from sleep, we fall
down before Thee, 0 Good One, and
the angelical hymn we cry aloud to
Thee, 0 Mighty One: Holy, Holy, Holy
art Thou, 0 God; through the
Theotokos, have mercy on us.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit.
From bed and sleep hast Thou raised
me up, 0 Lord: enlighten my mind
and heart, and open my lips that I may 
-10-
hymn Thee, 0 Holy Trinity: Holy,
Holy, Holy art Thou, 0 God; through
the Theotokos, have mercy on us.
Both now and ever, and unto the
ages of ages. Amen.
Suddenly the Judge shall come, and
the deeds of each shall be laid bare;
but with fear do we cry at midnight:
Holy, Holy, Holy art Thou, 0 God;
through the Theotokos, have mercy on
us.
Lord, have mercy. Twelve.
Prayer of Saint Basil the Great
to the Most Holy Trinity:
J\s I rise from sleep, I thank Thee,
J-\.. 0 Holy Trinity, for through Thy
great goodness and patience Thou
wast not angry with me, an idler and
sinner, nor hast Thou destroyed me
with mine iniquities, but hast shown
Thy usual love for mankind; and when
I was prostrate in despair, Thou hast 
-11-
raised me up to keep the morning
watch and glorify Thy power. And now
enlighten my mind's eye, and open my
mouth that I may meditate on Thy
words, and understand Thy commandments, and do Thy will, and hymn
Thee in heartfelt confession, and sing
praises to Thine all-holy name: of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages
of ages. Amen.
0 come let us worship God our
King.
0 come let us worship and fall down
before Christ_ our King and God.
0 come let us worship and fall down
before Christ Hims.elf, our King and
God.
PSALM 50
H
ave mercy on me, 0 God,
according to Thy great mercy;
and according to the multitude of Thy 
-12-
compassions blot out my transgression.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For
I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever
before me. Against Thee only have I
sinned and done this evil before Thee,
that Thou mightest be justified in Thy
words, and prevail when Thou art
judged. For behold, I was conceived in
iniquities, and in sins did my mother
bear me. For behold, Thou hast loved
truth; the hidden and secret things of
Thy wisdom hast Thou made manifest
unto me. Thou shalt sprinkle me with
hyssop, and I shall be made clean;
Thou shalt wash me, and I shall be
made whiter than snow. Thou shalt
make me to hear joy and gladness; the
bones that be humbled, they shall
rejoice. Turn Thy face away from my
sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God, 
-13-
and renew a right spirit within me.
Cast me not away from Thy presence,
and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, and with Thy governing Spirit
establish me. I shall teach transgressors Thy ways, and the ungodly shall
turn back unto Thee. Deliver me from
blood-guiltiness, 0 God, Thou God of
my salvation; my tongue shall rejoice
in Thy righteousness. 0 Lord, Thou
shalt open my lips, and my mouth shall
declare Thy praise. For if Thou hadst
desired sacrifice, I had given it; with
whole-burnt offerings Thou shalt not
be pleased. A sacrifice unto God is a
broken spirit; a he.art that is broken
and humbled God will not despise. Do
good, 0 Lord, in Thy good pleasure
unto Sion, and let the walls of
Jerusalem be builded. Then shalt
Thou be pleased with a sacrifice of 
-14-
righteousness, with oblation and
whole-burnt offerings. Then shall they
offer bullocks upon Thine altar.
The Symbol of the Orthodox Faith:
I believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of heaven and
earth, and of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, the Only-begotten,
begotten of the Father before all ages;
Light of Light; true God of true God;
begotten, not made; of one essence
with the Father; by Whom all things
were made; Who for us men, and for
our salvation, came down from the
heavens, and was incarnate of the Holy
Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and
became man; And was crucified for us
under Pontius Pilate, and suffered,
and was buried; And arose again on
the third day according to the
Scriptures; And ascended into the 
-15-
heavens, and sitteth at the right hand
of the Father; And shall come again,
with glory, to judge both the living and
, the dead; Whose kingdom shall have
no end. And in the Holy Spirit, the
Lord, the Giver of Life; Who proceedeth from the Father; Who with the
Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified; Who spake
by the prophets. In One, Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the remission of
sins. I look for the resurrection of the
dead, And the life of the age to come.
'Amen.
Prayer I, of St. Macarius the Great:
0 God, cleanse ·me a sinner, for I
have never done anything good
in Thy sight; but deliver me from the
evil one, and let Thy will be done in
me, that I may open mine unworthy
mouth without condemnation, and 
-16-
praise Thy holy name: of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Prayer II, of the same saint:
H
aving risen from sleep, I offer
unto Thee, 0 Saviour, the midnight hymn, and falling down I cry
unto Thee: Grant me not to fall asleep
in the death of sin, but have compassion on me, 0 Thou Who wast voluntarily crucified, and hasten to raise me
who am reclining in idleness, and save
me in prayer and intercession; and
after the night's sleep shine upon me
a sinless day, 0 Christ God, and save
me.
Prayer III, of the same saint:
H
aving risen from sleep, I hasten
to Thee, 0 Master, Lover of
mankind, and by Thy loving-kindness,
I strive to do Thy work, and I pray to 
-17-
Thee: Help me at all times, in everything, and deliver me from every
worldly, evil thing and every impulse of
the devil, and save me, and lead me
into Thine eternal kingdom. For
Thou art my Creator, and the Giver
and Provider of everything good, and
in Thee is all my hope, and unto Thee
do I send up glory, now and ever, and
unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Prayer IV, of the same saint:
0 Lord, Who in Thine abundant
goodness and Thy great compassion hast granted me, Thy servant, to
go through the time of the night that is
past without attack from any opposing
evil: Do Thou Thyself, 0 Master,
Creator of all things, vouchsafe me by
Thy true light and with an enlightened
heart to do Thy will, now and ever, and
unto the ages of ages. Amen. 
-18-
Prayer V, of St. Basil the Great:
0 Lord Almighty, God of hosts and
of all flesh, Who dwellest on high
and lookest down on things that are
lowly, Who searchest the heart and
innermost being, and clearly foreknowest the secrets of men; 0 unoriginate and everlasting Light, with
Whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning: Do Thou, 0
Immortal King, receive our supplications which we, daring because of the
multitude of Thy compassions, offer
Thee at the present time from defiled
lips; and forgive us our sins, in deed,
word, and thought, whether committed by us knowingly or in ignorance,
and cleanse us from every defilement
of flesh and spirit. And grant us to
pass through the night of the whole
present life with watchful heart and
sober thought, ever expecting the 
-19-
coming of the bright and appointed
day of Thine Only-begotten Son, our
Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus
Christ, whereon the Judge of all shall
come with glory to reward each
according to his deeds. May we not be
found fallen and idle, but watching,
and upright in activity, ready to accompany Him into the joy and divine
palace of His glory, where there is the
ceaseless sound of those that keep
festival, and the unspeakable delight of
those that behold the ineffable beauty
of Thy countenance. For Thou art the
true Light that enlightenest and
sanctifiest all, and all creation doth
hymn Thee unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Prayer VI, likewise by St. Basil:
We bless Thee, 0 Most High God
and Lord of mercy, Who ever
doest with us things both great and 
-20-
inscrutable, both glorious and awesome, of which there is no measure;
Who grantest to us sleep for rest from
our infirmities, and relaxation from
the labours of our much-toiling flesh.
We thank Thee that Thou hast not
destroyed us with our iniquities, but
hast shown Thy loving-kindness to
man as usual, and while we were lying
in despair upon our beds, Thou hast
raised us up that we might glorify Thy
dominion. Wherefore, we implore
Thy boundless goodness: Enlighten
the eyes of our understanding and
raise up our mind from the heavy
sleep of indolence; open our mouth
and fill it with Thy praise, that we may
be able steadily to hymn and confess
Thee, Who art God glorified in all and
by all, the unoriginate Father, with
Thine Only-begotten Son, and Thine
All-holy and good and life-creating 
-21-
Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages
of ages. Amen.
Prayer VII,
to the Most Holy Theotokos:
I sing of thy grace, 0 Sovereign Lady,
and I pray thee to grace my mind.
Teach me to step aright in the way of
Christ's commandments. Strengthen
me to keep awake in song, and drive
away the sleep of despondency.
0 Bride of God, by thy prayers release
me, bound with the bonds of sin.
Guard me by night and by day, and
deliver me from foes that defeat me.
0 bearer of God the Life-giver, enliven
me who am deadened by passions.
0 bearer of the Unwaning Light,
enlighten my blinded soul. 0 marvellous palace of the Master, make me to
be a house of the Divine Spirit. 0
bearer of the Healer, heal the perennial passions of my soul. Guide me to 
-22-
the path of repentance, for I am tossed
in the storm of life. Deliver me from
eternal fire, and from evil worms, and
from Tartarus. Let me not be exposed
to the rejoicing of demons, guilty as I
am of many sins. Renew me, grown
old from senseless sins, 0 most immaculate one. Present me untouched by
all torments, and pray for me to the
Master of all. Vouchsafe me to find the
joys of heaven with all the saints. 0
most holy Virgin, hearken unto the
voice of thine unprofitable servant.
Grant me torrents of tears, 0 most
pure one, to cleanse my soul from
impurity. I offer the groans of my
heart to thee unceasingly, strive for
me, 0 Sovereign Lady. Accept my service of supplication and offer it to compassionate God. 0 thou who art above
the angels, raise me above this world's
confusion. 0 Light-bearing heavenly 
-23-
tabernacle, direct the grace of the
Spirit in me. I raise my hands and lips
in thy praise, defiled as they are by
impurity, 0 all-immaculate one. Deliver
me from soul-corrupting evils, and
fervently intercede with Christ, to
Whom is due honour and worship,
now and ever, and unto the ages of
ages. Amen.
Prayer VIII,
to our Lord Jesus Christ:
0 my plenteously-merciful and allmerciful God, Lord Jesus Christ,
through Thy great love Thou didst
come down and become incarnate so
that Thou mightest save all. And again,
0 Saviour, save me by Thy grace, I pray
Thee. For if Thou shouldst save me for
my works, this would not be grace or a
gift, but rather a duty; yea, Thou Who
art great in compassion and ineffable
in mercy. For he that believeth in Me, 
-24-
Thou hast said, 0 my Christ, shall live
and never see death. If, then, faith in
Thee saveth the desperate, behold, I
believe, save me, for Thou art my
God and Creator. Let faith instead of
works be imputed to me, 0 my God,
for Thou wilt find no works which
could justify me. But may my faith suffice instead of all works, may it answer
for, may it acquit me, may it make me
a partaker of Thine eternal glory. And
let Satan not seize me and boast,
0 Word, that he hath torn me from
Thy hand and fold. But whether I
desire it or not, save me, 0 Christ my
Saviour, forestall me quickly, quickly,
for I perish. Thou art my God from my
mother's womb. Vouchsafe me,
0 Lord, to love Thee now as fervently
as I once loved sin itself, and also to
work for Thee without idleness,
diligently, as I worked before for 
-25-
deceptive Satan. But supremely shall I
work for Thee, my Lord and God,
Jesus Christ, all the days of my life, now
and ever, and unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Prayer IX,
to the Holy Guardian Angel:
0 holy angel that standeth by my
wretched soul and my passionate
life, forsake not me a sinner, nor
shrink from me because of mine
intemperance. Give no place for the
cunning demon to master me through
the violence of my mortal body,
strengthen my poor and feeble hand,
and guide me in the way of salvation.
Yea, 0 holy angel of God, guardian
and protector of my wretched soul
and body, forgive me all wherein I have
offended thee all the days of my life;
and if I have sinned during the
past night, protect me during the pres-
-26-
ent day, and guard me from every
temptation of the enemy, that I may
not anger God by any sin. And pray to
the Lord for me, that He may establish
me in His fear, and show me, His
servant, to be worthy of His goodness.
Amen.
Prayer X, to the Most Holy Theotokos:
0 my most holy lady Theotokos,
through thy holy and all-powerful prayers, banish from me, thy lowly
and wretched servant, despondency,
forgetfulness, folly, carelessness, and
all filthy, evil, and blasphemous
thoughts from my wretched heart and
my darkened mind. And quench the
flame of my passions, for I am poor
and wretched, and deliver me from
many and cruel memories and deeds,
and free me from all their evil
effects. For blessed art thou by all generations, and glorified is thy most hon-
-27-
ourable name unto the ages of ages.
Amen.
Prayer for the Salvation of Russia:
0 Lord Jesus Christ our God, forgive our iniquities. Through the intercessions of Thy most pure Mother, save
the suffering Russian people from the
yoke of the godless authority. Amen.
Prayerful Invocation of the Saint
Whose N aine we bear:
Pray unto God for me, 0 holy Godpleaser N., for I fervently flee unto
Thee, the speedy helper and intercessor for my soul.
Song to the Most Holy Theotokos:
0 Theotokos and Virgin, rejoice,
Mary, full of grac~, the Lord is with
thee; blessed art thou among women,
and blessed is the Fruit of thy womb,
for thou hast borne the Saviour of our
souls. 
-28-
Troparion to the Cross:
Save, 0 Lord, Thy people, and bless
Thine inheritance; grant Thou victory
to Orthodox Christians over enemies;
and by the power of Thy Cross do
Thou preserve Thy commonwealth.
Then off er a brief prayer for the health
and salvation of thy spiritual fat her, thy
parents, relatives, those in authority, benefactors, others known to thee, the ailing, or
those passing through sorrows.
And if it be possible, read this commemoration:
For the Living:
R
emember, 0 Lord Jesus Christ
our God, Thy mercies and compassions which are from the ages, for
the sake of which Thou didst become
man and didst will to endure crucifixion and death for the salvation of those
that rightly believe in Thee; and hav-
-29-
ing risen from the dead didst ascend
into the heavens and sittest at the
right hand of God the Father, and
regardest the humble entreaties of
those that call upon Thee with all
their heart; incline Thine ear, and
hearken unto the humble supplication of me, Thine unprofitable servant, as an odor of spiritual fragrance,
which I offer unto Thee for all Thy
people. And first, remember Thy
Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church,
which Thou hast provided through
Thine honourable Blood, and establish, and strengthen, and expand,
increase, pacify, and keep Her unconquerable by the g~tes of hades; calm
the dissensions of the churches,
quench the raging of the nations, and
quickly destroy and uproot the rising
of heresy, and bring them to nought
by the power of Thy Holy Spirit. Bow. 
-30-
Save, 0 Lord, and have mercy on
the Russian Land and her Orthodox
people both in the homeland and in
the diaspora, this land and its authorities. Bow.
Save, 0 Lord, and have mercy on the
holy Eastern Orthodox patriarchs,
most reverend metropolitans, Orthodox archbishops and bishops, and all
the priestly and monastic order, and all
who serve in the Church, whom Thou
hast appointed to shepherd Thy rational flock, and through their prayers have
mercy and save me, a sinner. Bow.
Save, 0 Lord, and have mercy on
my spiritual father N., and through his
holy prayers forgive my sins. Bow.
Save, 0 Lord, and have mercy on
my parents, Names, brothers and sisters, and my kindred according to the
flesh, and all the neighbours of my
family and friends, and grant them 
-31-
Thine earthly and spiritual good
things. Bow.
Save, 0 Lord, and have mercy on
the aged and the young, the poor and
the orphans and widows, and those in
sickness and sorrow, misfortune and
tribulation, those in difficult circumstances and in captivity, in prisons and
dungeons, and especially those of Thy
servants that are persecuted for Thy
sake and the Orthodox Faith by godless peoples, by apostates, and by
heretics; and remember them, visit,
strengthen, comfort, and by Thy power
quickly grant them relief, freedom,
and deliverance. Bow.
Save, 0 Lord, and have mercy on
them that hate and wrong me, and
make temptation for me, and let them
not perish because of me, a sinner.
Bow.
Illumine with the light of awareness 
-32-
the apostates from the Orthodox Faith,
and those blinded by pernicious heresies, and number them with Thy Holy,
Apostolic, Catholic Church. Bow.
For the Departed:
R
member, 0 Lord, those that have
departed this life, Orthodox
kings and queens, princes and princesses, most holy patriarchs, most reverend metropolitans, Orthodox archbishops and bishops, those in priestly
and clerical orders of the Church, and
those that have served Thee in the
monastic order, and grant them rest
with the saints in Thine eternal taber- .
nacles. Bow.
Remember, 0 Lord, the souls of
Thy departed servants, my parents,
Names, and all my kindred according
to the flesh; and forgive them all transgressions, voluntary and involuntary,
granting them the kingdom and a por-
-33-
tion of Thine eternal good things, and
the delight of Thine endless and
blessed life. Bow.
Remember, 0 Lord, also all our
fathers and brethren, and sisters, and
those that lie here, and all Orthodox
Christians that departed in the hope of
resurrection and life eternal, and settle
them with Thy saints, where the light
of Thy countenance shall visit them,
and have mercy on us, for Thou art
good and the Lover of mankind. Bow.
Grant, 0 Lord, remission of sins to
all our fathers, brethren, and sisters
that have departed before us in the
faith and hope of resurrection, and
make their memo_ry to be eternal.
Bow.
Final Prayer:
It is truly meet to bless thee, the
Theotokos, ever-blessed and most
blameless, and Mother of our God. 
-34-
More honourable than the Cherubim,
and beyond compare more glorious
than the Seraphim, who without corruption gavest birth to God the Word,
the very Theotokos, thee do we magnify.
Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Spirit, both now and
ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
Lord, have mercy. Thrice.
0 Lord, bless. And the dismissal:
0 Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, for
the sake of the prayers of Thy most
pure Mother, our holy and God-bearing fathers and all the saints, have
mercy on us. Amen. 
-35-