CONCERNING THE JESUS PRAYER
In the First Epistle to the Thessalonians the
Apostle Paul says: Pray without ceasing. How,
then, is one to pray unceasingly? By often
repeating the Jesus Prayer: "Lord Jesus Christ,
Son of God, have mercy on me." If one
becomes accustomed to this appeal, great consolation and the need to continually make this
petition will be felt within, and it will be carried on, as if of itself, within one.
Although in the beginning the enemy of
the human race will offer hindrances to this,
by causing great weariness, indolence, boredom, and over-powering sleep, having withstood all these with the help of God, one will
receive peace of soul, spiritual joy, a benevolent disposition towards people, tranquility of
thought, and gratitude toward God.
In the very name of Jesus Christ a great and
graceful power is inherent.
Many holy and righteous people advise
how one can often, almost without interruption, perform the Jesus Prayer.
Saint John Chrysostom says: "It is necessary
for everyone, whether eating, drinking, sitting,
serving, travelling, or doing anything, to
unceasingly cry: 'Lord Jesus Christ, Son of 
-401-
God, have mercy on me,' that the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, descending into the depths
of the heart, may subdue the pernicious serpent, and save and quicken the soul.
Saint Seraphim of Sarov: "Lord Jesus
Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me a sinner": let all thine attention and training be in
this. Walking, sitting, doing, and standing in
church before the divine service, coming in
and going out, keep this unceasingly on thy
lips and in thy heart. In calling in this manner
on the name of God thou wilt find peace, thou
wilt attain to purity of spirit and body, and the
Holy Spirit, the Origin of all good things, will
dwell in thee, and He will guide thee unto holiness, unto all piety and purity."
Bishop Theophanes the Recluse: "In order
to more conveniently become accustomed to
the remembrance of God, for this the fervent
Christian has a special means, namely, to
repeat unceasingly a brief prayer of two or
three words. Most often this is: 'Lord, have
mercy!' or 'Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy on
me a sinner.' If you have not yet heard of this,
then hear it now, and if you have not done it,
then begin to do it from this time.
"Those who have truly decided to serve the 
-402-
Lord God must train themselves in the remembrance of God and in unceasing prayer to
Jesus Christ, saying mentally: 'Lord Jesus
Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me a sinner.'
"Through such practice, by guarding oneself from distraction and by the preservation of
the peace of one's conscience, it is possible to
draw near to God and to be united with Him.
For, according to the words of Saint Isaac the
Syrian, 'Without unceasing prayer we cannot
draw near to God' (St. Seraphim of Sarov)."
Saint John of Kronstadt likewise frequently
counselled the doing of the Jesus Prayer. 