Sunday Troparia and Kontakia
FIRST TONE:
Troparion: When the stone had been
sealed by the Jews, and the soldiers
were guarding Thine immaculate
Body, Thou didst arise on the third
day, 0 Saviour, granting life unto the
world. Wherefore, the Hosts of the
heavens cried out to Thee, 0 Lifegiver: Glory to Thy Resurrection, 0
Christ. Glory to Thy kingdom. Glory
to Thy dispensation, 0 only Lover of
mankind. 
-145-
Kontakion: As God, Thou didst arise
. from the tomb in glory, and Thou
i didst raise the world together with
Thyself. And mortal nature praiseth
Thee as God, and death hath vanished.
And Adam danceth, 0 Master, and
Eve, now freed from fetters, rejoiceth
as she crieth out: Thou art He,
0 Christ, that grantest unto all resurrection.
SECOND TONE:
Troparion: When Thou didst descend
unto death, 0 Life Immortal, then
didst Thou slay hades with the lightning of Thy Divinity. And when Thou
didst also raise the dead out of the
nethermost depths, all the Hosts of the
heavens cried out: 0 Life-giver, Christ
our God, glory be to Thee.
Kontakion: Thou didst arise from the
tomb, 0 omnipotent Saviour, and
hades was terrified on beholding the 
-146-
wonder; and the dead arose, and
creation at the sight thereof rejoiceth
with Thee. And Adam also is joyful,
and the world, 0 my Saviour, praiseth
Thee for ever.
THIRD TONE:
Troparion: Let the heavens be glad; let
earthly things rejoice; for the Lord
hath wrought might with His arm. He
hath trampled down death by death;
the firstborn of the dead hath He
become. From the belly of hades hath
He delivered us and hath granted to
the world great mercy.
Kontakion: Thou didst arise today
from the tomb, 0 Merciful One, and
didst lead us out of the gates of
death. Today Adam danceth and Eve
rejoiceth; and together with them both
the Prophets and the Patriarchs unceasingly praise the divine might of Thine
authority. 
l -147-
FOURTH TONE:
Troparion: Having learned the joyful
proclamation of the Resurrection from
the angel, and having cast off the
ancestral condemnation, the women
disciples of the Lord spake to the apostles exultantly: Death is despoiled and
Christ God is risen, granting to the
world great mercy.
Kontakion: My Saviour and Redeemer
hath, as God, raised up the earthborn
from the grave and from their fetters,
and He hath broken the gates of
hades, and, as Master, hath risen on
the third day.
FIFTH TONE:
Troparion: Let us, -o faithful, praise
and worship the Word Who is co-unoriginate with the Father and the Spirit,
and Who was born of the Virgin for
our salvation; for He was pleased to
ascend the Cross in the flesh and to 
-148-
endure death, and to raise the dead by
His glorious Resurrection.
Kontakion: Unto hades, 0 my
Saviour, didst Thou descend, and having broken its gates as One omnipotent, Thou, as Creator, didst raise up
the dead together with Thyself.
And Thou didst break the sting of
death, and didst deliver Adam from
the curse, 0 Lover of mankind.
Wherefore, we all cry unto Thee: Save
us, 0 Lord.
SIXTH TONE:
Troparion: Angelic Hosts were above
Thy tomb, and they that guarded Thee
became as dead. And Mary stood by the
grave seeking Thine immaculate Body.
Thou didst despoil hades and wast not
tempted by it. Thou didst meet the
Virgin and didst grant us life. 0 Thou
Who didst rise from the dead, 0 Lord,
glory be to Thee. 
-149-
Kontakion: Having by His life-bestowing
hand raised up all the dead out of the
dark abysses, Christ God, the Giver of
Life, hath bestowed the Resurrection
upon the fallen human race; for He is
the Saviour of all, die Resurrection,
and the Life, and the God of all.
SEVENTH TONE:
Troparion: Thou didst destroy death
by Thy Cross, Thou didst open Paradise to the thief. Thou didst change
the lamentation of the Myrrh-bearers,
and Thou didst command Thine
_.\postles to proclaim that Thou didst
arise, 0 Christ God, and grantest to
the world great mercy.
Kontakion: No longer will the dominion of death be able to keep men captive; for Christ hath descended, demolishing and destroying the powers
thereof. Hades is bound; the Prophets
rejoice with one voice, saying: A 
-150-
Saviour hath come for them that have
faith. Come forth, ye faithful, for the
Resurrection.
EIGHTH TONE:
Troparion: From on high didst Thou
descend, 0 Compassionate One; to
burial of three days hast Thou submitted that Thou mightest free us from
our passions. 0 our Life and Resurrection, 0 Lord, glory be to Thee.
Kontakion: Having arisen from the
tomb, Thou didst raise up the dead
and didst resurrect Adam. Eve also
danceth at Thy Resurrection, and the
ends of the world celebrate Thine arising from the dead, 0 Greatly-merciful
One. 
-151-